CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

1

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
ARRANGEMENT OF ARTICLES
CHAPTER I

The Republic of Malta
Article
1.

The Republic and its Territories.

2.

Religion.

3.

National Flag.

4.

National Anthem.

5.

Language.

6.

Constitution to be supreme law.
CHAPTER II

Declaration of Principles
7.

Right to work.

8.

Promotion of culture, etc.

9.

Safeguarding of landscape and historical and artistic patrimony.

10.

Compulsory and free primary education.

11.

Educational interest.

12.

Protection of work.

13.

Hours of work.

14.

Rights of women workers.

15.

Minimum age for paid labour.

16.

Safeguarding labour of minors.

17.

Social assistance and insurance.

18.

Encouragement of private economic enterprise.

19.

Protection of artisan trades.

20.

Encouragement of co-operatives.

20A.
21.

Participation of Maltese citizens living abroad.
Application of the principles contained in this Chapter.
CHAPTER III

Citizenship
22.

Persons who become citizens on appointed day.

23.

Persons entitled to be registered as citizens.

24.

Persons naturalized or registered as resident before appointed day.

25.

Acquisition of citizenship by birth or descent by persons born on or after

2

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
appointed day.
26.

Marriage to citizen of Malta.

27.

Dual citizenship.

28.

Commonwealth citizens.

29.

Criminal liability of Commonwealth citizens.

30.

Powers of Parliament.

31.

Interpretation.
CHAPTER IV

Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of the Individual
32.

Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual.

33.

Protection of right to life.

34.

Protection from arbitrary arrest or detention.

35.

Protection from forced labour.

36.

Protection from inhuman treatment.

37.

Protection from deprivation of property without compensation.

38.

Protection for privacy of home or other property.

39.

Provisions to secure protection of law.

40.

Protection of freedom of conscience and worship.

41.

Protection of freedom of expression.

42.

Protection of freedom of assembly and association.

43.

Prohibition of deportation.

44.

Protection of freedom of movement.

45.

Protection from discrimination on the grounds of race, etc.

46.

Enforcement of protective provisions.

47.

Interpretation of Chapter IV.
CHAPTER V

The President
48.

Establishment of the office of President.

49.

Discharge of President’s functions during vacancy, etc.

50.

Oath to be taken by the President.
CHAPTER VI

Parliament
PART 1
Composition of Parliament
51.

Establishment of Parliament.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
52.

Composition of the House of Representatives.

53.

Qualifications for membership of House of Representatives.

54.

Disqualifications for membership of House of Representatives.

55.

Tenure of office of members.

56.

Voting at Elections.

57.

Qualification of voters.

58.

Disqualification of voters.

59.

Speaker and Deputy Speaker.

60.

Establishment of Electoral Commission.

61.

Electoral divisions.

3

61A. Gozo and the islands of the Maltese Archipelago other than the Island of
Malta not to be divided
62.

Filling of vacancies.

63.

Determination of questions as to membership.

64.

Clerk to House of Representatives and his staff.

64A.

Office of Ombudsman.
PART 2

Powers and Procedure of Parliament
65.

Power to make laws.

66.

Alteration of this Constitution.

67.

Regulation of procedure in House of Representatives.

68.

Oath to be taken by members of House of Representatives.

69.

Presiding in House of Representatives.

70.

Quorum in House of Representatives.

71.

Voting.

72.

Mode of exercising legislative powers.

73.

Restriction with regard to certain financial measures.

74.

Language of Laws.
PART 3

Summoning, Prorogation and Dissolution
75.

Sessions of Parliament.

76.

Prorogation and dissolution of Parliament.

77.

General elections.
CHAPTER VII

The Executive
78.

Executive authority of Malta.

4

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
79.

The Cabinet.

80.

Appointment of Ministers.

81.

Tenure of office of Ministers.

82.

Allocation of portfolios to Ministers.

83.

Acting Prime Minister.

84.

Temporary Ministers.

85.

Exercise of functions of President.

86.

Exercise of Prime Minister’s functions.

87.

President to be informed concerning matters of government.

88.

Parliamentary Secretaries.

89.

Oath to be taken by Ministers.

90.

Leader of the Opposition.

91.

Attorney General.

91A.

State Advocate.

92.

Permanent Secretaries and heads of government departments.

93.

Prerogative of mercy.

94.

Secretary to the Cabinet.
CHAPTER VIII

The Judiciary
95.

Superior Courts.

96.

Appointment of judges.

96A.

Judicial Appointments Committee.

97.

Tenure of office of judges.

98.

Acting Chief Justice and acting judges.

99.

Inferior Courts.

100.

Magistrates.

101.

Oaths to be taken by judges and magistrates.

101A.

Commission for the Administration of Justice.
CHAPTER IX

Finance
102.

Consolidated Fund.

103.

Authorisation of expenditure from Consolidated Fund.

104.

Authorisation of expenditure before appropriation.

105.

Contingencies Fund.

106.

Public debt.

107.

Remuneration in respect of certain offices.

108.

Auditor General.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
CHAPTER X

The Public Service
109.

Public Service Commission.

110.

Appointment, etc. of public officers.

111.

Principal representatives of Malta abroad.

112.

Appointment on transfer in respect of certain offices.

113.

Protection of pension rights.

114.

Grant and withholding of pensions, etc.

115.

Protection of Public Service Commission from legal proceedings.

CHAPTER XA

Local Councils
115A. Local Councils.
CHAPTER XI

Miscellaneous
116.

Actions on validity of laws.

117.

Prohibition of certain associations.

118.

Broadcasting Authority.

119.

Function of the Broadcasting Authority.

120.

Employment Commission.

121.

Powers and procedure of Commissions.

122.

Resignations.

123.

Reappointments, etc.

124.

Interpretation.

SCHEDULES TO THE CONSTITUTION
FIRST SCHEDULE
SECOND SCHEDULE:
THIRD SCHEDULE:
FOURTH SCHEDULE:

Oaths Of Office
Oath of Allegiance
List of Commonwealth Countries other than Malta

5

6

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
The Malta Independence Order, 1964, as amended by Acts: XLI of 1965,
XXXVII of 1966, IX of 1967, XXVI of 1970, XLVII of 1972, LVII,
LVIII.1974, XXXVIII of 1976, X of 1977, XXIX of 1979, IV of 1987, XXIII
of 1989; Proclamations Nos. II and VI of 1990; Acts XIX of 1991, IX of
1994; Proclamations IV of 1995 and III of 1996; Acts: XI of 1996, XVII of
1997, III of 2000, XIII of 2001, V of 2003, XIV and XXI of 2007, XX of
2011, VII and X of 2014, XXIV of 2015, XLII of 2016, XLIV of 2016 and IV
of 2018 , XXII of 2018 III of 2019 and XXV of 2019 and XIX , XLII, XLIII,
XLIV, XLV and XLI and LV of 2020 and XII, XX and XXVI of 2021 and XVI of
2022 and III of 2024.

21st September, 1964 *
CHAPTER I
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.2.
The Republic and
its territories.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.3.
Amended by:
IV.1987.2.

The Republic of Malta
1. (1) Malta is a democratic republic founded on work and on
respect for the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual.
(2) The territories of Malta consist of those territories
co m prised in Ma lta im m edi ate ly before the app oi nt ed day,
including the territorial waters thereof, or of such territories and
waters as Parliament may from time to time by law determine.
(3) Malta is a neutral state actively pursuing peace, security
and social progress among all nations by adhering to a policy of
non-alignment and refusing to participate in any military alliance.
Such a status will, in particular, imply that:
(a) no foreign military base will be permitted on Maltese
territory;
(b) no military facilities in Malta will be allowed to be
used by any foreign forces except at the request of the
Government of Malta, and only in the following cases:
(i) in the exercise of the inherent right of selfdefence in the event of any armed violation of
the area over which the Republic of Malta has
sovereignty, or in pursuance of measures or
actions decided by the Security Council of the
United Nations; or
(ii) whenever there exists a threat to the sovereignty,
independence, neutrality, unity or territorial
integrity of the Republic of Malta;
(c) except as aforesaid, no other facilities in Malta will be
allowed to be used in such manner or extent as will
amount to the presence in Malta of a concentration of
foreign forces;
(d) except as aforesaid, no foreign military personnel will
be allowed on Maltese territory, other than military
personnel performing, or assisting in the performance
*See The Malta Independence Order of the 2nd of September, 1964.

7

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
of, civil works or activities, and other than a
reasonable number of military technical personnel
assisting in the defence of the Republic of Malta;
(e) the shipyards of the Republic of Malta will be used for
civil commercial purposes, but may also be used,
within reasonable limits of time and quantity, for the
repair of military vessels which have been put in a
state of non-combat or for the construction of vessels;
and in accordance with the principles of non-alignment
the said shipyards will be denied to the military
vessels of the two superpowers.
2. (1)
Religion.

The religion of Malta is the Roman Catholic Apostolic

Religion.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.4.

(2) The authorities of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Church
have the duty and the right to teach which principles are right and
which are wrong.
(3) Religious teaching of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Faith
shall be provided in all State schools as part of compulsory
education.
3. (1) The National Flag of Malta consists of two equal
vertical stripes, white in the hoist and red in the fly.

National Flag.
Substituted by
LVIII.1974.5.

(2) A representation of the George Cross awarded to Malta by
His Majesty King George the Sixth on the 15th April, 1942 is
carried, edged with red, in the canton of the white stripe.
4.
The National Anthem of Malta is "L-Innu Malti" opening
with the words "Lil din l-Art ]elwa 1-Omm li tatna isimha".

National Anthem.

5. (1)
language.

Language.

The National language of Malta is the Maltese

(2) The Maltese and the English languages and such other
language as may be prescribed by Parliament (by a law passed by
not less than two-thirds of all the members of the House of
Representatives) shall be the official languages of Malta and the
Administration may for all official purposes use any of such
languages:
Provided that any person may address the Administration in
any of the official languages and the reply of the Administration
thereto shall be in such language.
(3)

The language of the Courts shall be the Maltese language:

Provided that Parliament may make such provision for the
use of the English language in such cases and under such
conditions as it may prescribe.
(4) The House of Representatives may, in regulating its own
procedure, determine the language or languages that shall be used
in Parliamentary proceedings and records.

8
Constitution to be
supreme law.
Substituted by:
LVII.1974.2;
LVIII.1974.69.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
6.
Subject to the provisions of sub-articles (7) and (9) of
article 47 and of article 66 of this Constitution, if any other law is
inconsistent with this Constitution, this Constitution shall prevail
and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.
CHAPTER II

Declaration of Principles
Right to work.

7.
The State recognises the right of all citizens to work and
shall promote such conditions as will make this right effective.

Promotion of
culture, etc.

8.
The State shall promote the development of culture and
scientific and technical research.

Safeguarding of
landscape and
historical and
artistic patrimony.
Amended by:
XXII.2018.2.

9.
(1) The State shall safeguard the landscape and the
historical and artistic patrimony of the Nation.
(2) The State shall protect and conserve the environment and its
resources for the benefit of the present and future generations and shall
take measures to address any form of environmental degradation in
Malta, including that of air, water and land, and any sort of pollution
problem and to promote, nurture and support the right of action in
favour of the environment.

Compulsory and
free primary
education.

10.
Primary education shall be compulsory and in State
schools shall be free of charge.

Educational
interests.

11. (1) Capable and deserving students, even if without
financial resources, are entitled to attain the highest grades of
education.
(2) The State shall give effect to this principle by means of
scholarships, of contributions to the families of students and other
provisions on the basis of competitive examinations.

Protection of work.

12. (1) The State shall protect work.
(2) It shall provide for the professional or vocational training
and advancement of workers.

Hours of work.

13. (1) The maximum number of hours of work per day shall
be fixed by law.
(2) The worker is entitled to a weekly day of rest and to annual
holidays with pay; he cannot renounce this right.

Equal rights of
men and women.
Substituted by:
XIX.1991.2.

14. The State shall promote the equal right of men and women
to enjoy all economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights and
for this purpose shall take appropriate measures to eliminate all
f o r m s o f d i s c r i m i n a t i o n b e t w e e n t h e se x e s b y a n y p e r s o n ,
organisation or enterprise; the State shall in particular aim at
ensuring that women workers enjoy equal rights and the same
wages for the same work as men.

Minimum age for
paid labour.

15.
law.

The minimum age for paid labour shall be prescribed by

Safeguarding
labour of minors.

16.

The State shall provide for safeguarding the labour of

9

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
minors and assure to them the right to equal pay for equal work.
17. (1) Every citizen incapable of work and unprovided with
the resources necessary for subsistence is entitled to maintenance
and social assistance.

Social assistance
and insurance.

(2) Workers are entitled to reasonable insurance on a
contributory basis for their requirements in case of accident,
illness, disability, old-age and involuntary unemployment.
(3) Disabled persons and persons incapable of work are entitled
to education and vocational training.
18.

The State shall encourage private economic enterprise.

Encouragement of
private economic
enterprise.

19. The State shall provide for the protection and development
of artisan trades.

Protection of
artisan trades.

20. The State recognises the social function of co-operatives
and shall encourage their development.

Encouragement of
co-operatives.

20A. The State shall facilitate the participation of Maltese
citizens who live abroad in the political, social, economic and
cultural life of Malta.

Participation of
Maltese citizens
living abroad.
Added by:
XX.2011.12.

21. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be enforceable in
any court, but the principles therein contained are nevertheless
fundamental to the governance of the country and it shall be the
aim of the State to apply these principles in making laws.

Application of the
principles
contained in this
Chapter.

CHAPTER III

Citizenship
22. (1) The acquisition, possession, renunciation and loss of
Maltese citizenship shall be regulated by law.
(2) Dual or multiple citizenship is permitted in accordance with
any law for the time being in force in Malta.
23. (1) Every person who under this Constitution or any Act
of Parliament is a citizen of Malta or under any enactment for the
time being in force in any country to which this article applies is a
citizen of that country shall, by virtue of that citizenship, have the
status of a Commonwealth citizen.
(2) Every person who is a British subject without citizenship
under the British Nationality Act, 1948 or who continues to be a
British subject under article 2 of that Act shall by virtue of that
status have the status of a Commonwealth citizen.
(3) The countries to which this article applies are those listed in
the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution.
(4) The President may by Proclamation amend, add to, revoke
or substitute the list of countries in the Fourth Schedule to this
Constitution.

Citizenship
regulated by law.
Substituted by:
III.2000.2.

Commonwealth
citizens.
Amended by:
XLI.1965.3;
IX.1967;
XXIII.1989.6.
Renumbered by:
III.2000.4.

10
Criminal liability
of Commonwealth
citizens.
Renumbered and
amended by:
III.2000.5.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
24. (1) A Commonwealth citizen who is not a citizen of Malta
or a citizen of the Republic of Ireland who is not a citizen of Malta
shall not be guilty of an offence against any law in force in Malta
by reason of anything done or omitted in any part of the
Commonwealth other than Malta or in the Republic of Ireland or in
any foreign country unless (a) the act or omission would be an offence if he were an
alien; and
(b) in the case of an act or omission in any part of the
Commonwealth or in the Republic of Ireland, it would
be an offence if the country in which the act was done
or the omission made were a foreign country.
(2)

In this article -

"alien" means a person who is not a Commonwealth citizen, a
British protected person or a citizen of the Republic of Ireland;
"British Protected Person" means a person who is a British
protected person for the purposes of the British Nationality Act,
1948 or any other law of the United Kingdom replacing that Act;
"foreign country" means a country (other than the Republic of
Ireland) that is not a part of the Commonwealth.
Acquisition of
citizenship by birth
or descent by
persons born on or
after appointed
day.
Substituted by:
XXIII.1989.3.

25. Repealed by Act III of 2000.

Marriage to citizen
of Malta.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.8.
Substituted by:
XXIII.1989.4.

26. Repealed by Act III of 2000.

Dual citizenship.
Amended by:
XXXVII. 1966.2;
LVIII.1974.9;
XXIII.1989.5.

27. Repealed by Act III of 2000.

28. and 29. were renumbered by Act III of 2000.

Powers of
Parliament.

30. Repealed by Act III of 2000.

Interpretation.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.10;
X.1977.2;
XXIII.1989.7.

31. Repealed by Act III of 2000.

CHAPTER IV

Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of the Individual

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
32. Whereas every person in Malta is entitled to the
fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say,
the right, whatever his race, place of origin, political opinions,
colour, creed, sex, sexual orientation or gender identity, but subject
to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public
interest, to each and all of the following, namely -

11
Fundamental rights
and freedoms of
the individual.
Amended by:
X.2014.2.

(a) life, liberty, security of the person, the enjoyment of
property and the protection of the law;
(b) freedom of conscience, of expression and of peaceful
assembly and association; and
(c) respect for his private and family life,
the subsequent provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the
purpose of affording protection to the aforesaid rights and
freedoms, subject to such limitations of that protection as are
contained in those provisions being limitations designed to ensure
that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any
individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or
the public interest.
33. (1) No person shall intentionally be deprived of his life
save in execution of the sentence of a court in respect of a criminal
offence under the law of Malta of which he has been convicted.

Protection of right
to life.

(2) Without prejudice to any liability for a contravention of any
other law with respect to the use of force in such cases as are
hereinafter mentioned, a person shall not be regarded as having
been deprived of his life in contravention of this article if he dies as
the result of the use of force to such extent as is reasonably
justifiable in the circumstances of the case (a) for the defence of any person from violence or for the
defence of property;
(b) in order to effect a lawful arrest or to prevent the
escape of a person lawfully detained;
(c) for the purpose of suppressing a riot, insurrection or
mutiny; or
(d) in order to prevent the commission by that person of a
criminal offence,
or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
34. (1) No person shall be deprived of his personal liberty
save as may be authorised by law in the following cases, that is to
say (a) in consequence of his unfitness to plead to a criminal
charge;
(b) in execution of the sentence or order of a court,
whether in Malta or elsewhere, in respect of a criminal
offence of which he has been convicted;
(c) in execution of the order of a court punishing him for
contempt of that court or of another court or tribunal
or in execution of the order of the House of
Representatives punishing him for contempt of itself

Protection from
arbitrary arrest or
detention.
Amended by:
III.2024.3.

12

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
or of its members or for breach of privilege;
(d) in execution of the order of a court made to secure the
fulfilment of any obligation imposed on him by law;
(e) for the purpose of bringing him before a court in
execution of the order of a court or before the House of
Representatives in execution of the order of that
House;
(f)

upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed, or
being about to commit, a criminal offence;

(g) in the case of a person who has not attained the age of
eighteen years, for the purpose of his education or
welfare;
(h) for the purpose of preventing the spread of an
infectious or contagious disease;
(i)

in the case of a person who is, or is reasonably
suspected to be, of unsound mind, addicted to drugs or
alcohol, or a vagrant, for the purpose of his care or
treatment or the protection of the community; or

(j)

for the purpose of preventing the unlawful entry of that
person into Malta, or for the purpose of effecting the
expulsion, extradition or other lawful removal of that
person from Malta or the taking of proceedings
relating thereto or for the purpose of restraining that
person while he is being conveyed through Malta in
the course of his extradition or removal as a convicted
prisoner from one country to another.

(2) Any person who is arrested or detained shall be informed at
the time of his arrest or detention, in a language that he
understands, of the reasons for his arrest or detention:
Provided that if an interpreter is necessary and is not readily
available or if it is otherwise impracticable to comply with the
provisions of this sub-article at the time of the person’s arrest or
detention, such provisions shall be complied with as soon as
practicable.
(3)

Any person who is arrested or detained (a) for the purpose of bringing him before a court in
execution of the order of a court; or
(b) upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed, or
being about to commit, a criminal offence,

and who is not released, shall be brought not later than forty-eight
hours before a court; and if any person arrested or detained in such
a case as is mentioned in paragraph (b) of this sub-article is not
tried within a reasonable time, then, without prejudice to any
further proceedings which may be brought against him, he shall be
released either unconditionally or upon reasonable conditions,
including in particular such conditions as are reasonably necessary
to ensure that he appears at a later date for trial or for proceedings
preliminary to trial:

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

13

Provided that Parliament may by law provide for the
extension, subject to adequate procedural safeguards and to the
authorisation of a Magistrate, of the period of forty-eight (48) hours
within which the person arrested or detained shall be brought before a
court, by another period not exceeding a further forty-eight (48) hours if
the person who is arrested or detained is reasonably suspected to have
committed a crime liable to a maximum punishment exceeding twelve
(12) years imprisonment.
(4) Any person who is unlawfully arrested or detained by any
other person shall be entitled to compensation therefor from that
person.
(5) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this
article to the extent that the law in question authorises the taking
during such a period of public emergency as is referred to in
pa r a g ra ph (a) o r ( c) o f su b - a r t ic le ( 2 ) o f ar t ic le 4 7 of th i s
Constitution of measures that are reasonably justifiable for the
purpose of dealing with the situation that exists during that period
of public emergency.
(6) If any person who is lawfully detained by virtue only of
such a law as is referred to in the last foregoing sub-article so
requests at any time during the period of that detention not earlier
than six months after he last made such a request during that
period, his case shall be reviewed by an independent and impartial
tribunal established by law and composed of a person or persons
each of whom holds or has held judicial office or is qualified to be
appointed to such office in Malta.
(7) On any review by a tribunal in pursuance of the last
foregoing sub-article of the case of any detained person, the
tribunal may make recommendations concerning the necessity or
expediency of continuing his detention to the authority by whom it
was ordered, but, unless it is otherwise provided by law, that
authority shall not be obliged to act in accordance with any such
recommendations.
35. (1) No person shall be required to perform forced labour.
(2) For the purposes of this article, the expression "forced
labour" does not include (a) any labour required in consequence of the sentence or
order of a court;
(b) labour required of any person while he is lawfully
detained by sentence or order of a court that, though
not required in consequence of such sentence or order,
is reasonably necessary in the interests of hygiene or
for the maintenance of the place at which he is
detained or, if he is detained for the purpose of his
care, treatment, education or welfare, is reasonably
required for that purpose;
(c) any labour required of a member of a disciplined force
in pursuance of his duties as such or, in the case of a

Protection from
forced labour.

14

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
person who has conscientious objections to service as
a member of a naval, military or air force, any labour
that that person is required by law to perform in place
of such service;
(d) any labour required during a period of public
emergency or in the event of any other emergency or
calamity that threatens the life or well-being of the
community.

Protection from
inhuman treatment.

36. (1) No person shall be subjected to inhuman or degrading
punishment or treatment.
(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this
article to the extent that the law in question authorises the infliction
of any description of punishment which was lawful in Malta
immediately before the appointed day.
(3) (a) No law shall provide for the imposition of collective
punishments.
(b) Nothing in this sub-article shall preclude the imposition of
collective punishments upon the members of a disciplined force in
accordance with the law regulating the discipline of that force.

Protection from
deprivation of
property without
compensation.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.11.

37. (1) No property of any description shall be compulsorily
taken possession of, and no interest in or right over property of any
description shall be compulsorily acquired, except where provision
is made by a law applicable to that taking of possession or
acquisition (a) for the payment of adequate compensation;
(b) securing to any person claiming such compensation a
right of access to an independent and impartial court or
tribunal established by law for the purpose of
determining his interest in or right over the property
and the amount of any compensation to which he may
be entitled, and for the purpose of obtaining payment
of that compensation; and
(c) securing to any party to proceedings in that court or
tribunal relating to such a claim a right of appeal from
its determination to the Court of Appeal in Malta:
Provided that in special cases Parliament may, if it deems it
appropriate so to act in the national interest, by law establish the
criteria which are to be followed, including the factors and other
circumstances to be taken into account, in the determination of the
compensation payable in respect of property compulsorily taken
possession of or acquired; and in any such case the compensation
shall be determined and shall be payable accordingly.
(2) Nothing in this article shall be construed as affecting the
making or operation of any law so far as it provides for the taking
of possession or acquisition of property (a) in satisfaction of any tax, rate or due;

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(b) by way of penalty for, or as a consequence of, breach
of the law, whether under civil process or after
conviction of a criminal offence;
(c) upon the attempted removal of the property out of or
into Malta in contravention of any law;
(d) by way of the taking of a sample for the purposes of
any law;
(e) where the property consists of an animal upon its
being found trespassing or straying;
(f)

as an incident of a lease, tenancy, licence, privilege or
hypothec, mortgage, charge, bill of sale, pledge or
other contract;

(g) by way of the vesting or administration of property on
behalf and for the benefit of the person entitled to the
beneficial interest therein, trust property, enemy
property or the property of persons adjudged bankrupt
or otherwise declared bankrupt or insolvent, persons of
unsound mind, deceased persons, or bodies corporate
or unincorporate in the course of being wound up or
liquidated;
(h) in the execution of judgments or orders of courts;
(i)

by reason of its being in a dangerous state or injurious
to the health of human beings, animals or plants;

(j)

in consequence of any law with respect to the
limitation of actions, acquisitive prescription, derelict
land, treasure trove, mortmain or the rights of
succession competent to the Government of Malta; or

(k) for so long only as may be necessary for the purposes
of any examination, investigation, trial or inquiry or,
in the case of land, the carrying out thereon (i) of work of soil conservation or the conservation
of other natural resources of any description or
of war damage reconstruction; or
(ii) of agricultural development or improvement
which the owner or occupier of the land has been
required and has without reasonable and lawful
excuse refused or failed to carry out.
(3) Nothing in this article shall be construed as affecting the
making or operation of any law so far as it provides for vesting in
the Government of Malta the ownership of any underground
minerals, water or antiquities.
(4) Nothing in this article shall be construed as affecting the
making or operation of any law for the compulsory taking of
possession in the public interest of any property, or the compulsory
acquisition in the public interest of any interest in or right over
property, where that property, interest or right is held by a body
corporate which is established for public purposes by any law and
in which no monies have been invested other than monies provided
by any legislature in Malta.

15

16
Protection for
privacy of home or
other property.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
38. (1) Except with his own consent or by way of parental
discipline, no person shall be subjected to the search of his person
or his property or the entry by others on his premises.
(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this
article to the extent that the law in question makes provision (a) that is reasonably required in the interest of defence,
public safety, public order, public morality or decency,
public health, town and country planning, the
development and utilisation of mineral resources, or
the development and utilisation of any property in
such a manner as to promote the public benefit;
(b) that is reasonably required for the purpose of
promoting the rights or freedoms of other persons;
(c) that authorises a department of the Government of
Malta, or a local government authority, or a body
corporate established by law for a public purpose, to
enter on the premises of any person in order to inspect
those premises or anything thereon for the purpose of
any tax, rate or due or in order to carry out work
connected with any property or installation which is
lawfully on those premises and which belongs to that
Government, that authority, or that body corporate, as
the case may be; or
(d) that authorises, for the purpose of enforcing a
judgment or order of a court, the search of any person
or property by order of a court or entry upon any
premises by such order, or that is necessary for the
purpose of preventing or detecting criminal offences,
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing
done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably
justifiable in a democratic society.

Provisions to
secure protection
of law.

39. (1) Whenever any person is charged with a criminal
offence he shall, unless the charge is withdrawn, be afforded a fair
hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial
court established by law.
(2) Any court or other adjudicating authority prescribed by law
for the determination of the existence or the extent of civil rights or
o b l i g a t i o n s sh a ll b e i n d e p e n d e n t an d i m p a r t i a l ; a nd w h e r e
proceedings for such a determination are instituted by any person
before such a court or other adjudicating authority, the case shall be
given a fair hearing within a reasonable time.
(3) Except with the agreement of all the parties thereto, all
proceedings of every court and proceedings relat ing to the
determination of the existence or the extent of a person’s civil
rights or obligations before any other adjudicating authority,
including the announcement of the decision of the court or other
authority, shall be held in public.
(4) Nothing in sub-article (3) of this article shall prevent any
court or any authority such as is mentioned in that sub-article from

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
excluding from the proceedings persons other than the parties
thereto and their legal representatives (a) in proceedings before a court of voluntary jurisdiction
and other proceedings which, in the practice of the
Courts in Malta are, or are of the same nature as those
which are, disposed of in chambers;
(b) in proceedings under any law relating to income tax;
or
(c) to such extent as the court or other authority (i) may consider necessary or expedient in
circumstances where publicity would prejudice
the interests of justice; or
(ii) may be empowered or required by law to do so
in the interests of defence, public safety, public
order, public morality or decency, the welfare of
persons under the age of eighteen years or the
protection of the private lives of persons
concerned in the proceedings.
(5) Every person who is charged with a criminal offence shall
be presumed to be innocent until he is proved or has pleaded guilty:
Provided that nothing contained in or done under the
authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in
contravention of this sub-article to the extent that the law in
question imposes upon any person charged as aforesaid the burden
of proving particular facts.
(6)

Every person who is charged with a criminal offence (a) shall be informed in writing, in a language which he
understands and in detail, of the nature of the offence
charged;
(b) shall be given adequate time and facilities for the
preparation of his defence;
(c) shall be permitted to defend himself in person or by a
legal representative and a person who cannot afford to
pay for such legal representation as is reasonably
required by the circumstances of his case shall be
entitled to have such representation at the public
expense;
(d) shall be afforded facilities to examine in person or by
his legal representative the witnesses called by the
prosecution before any court and to obtain the
attendance of witnesses subject to the payment of their
reasonable expenses, and carry out the examination of
witnesses to testify on his behalf before the court on
the same conditions as those applying to witnesses
called by the prosecution; and
(e) shall be permitted to have without payment the
assistance of an interpreter if he cannot understand the
language used at the trial of the charge,

17

18

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his
absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance
of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has
ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence.
(7) When a person is tried for any criminal offence, the accused
person or any person authorised by him in that behalf shall, if he so
requires and subject to payment of such reasonable fee as may be
prescribed by law, be given within a reasonable time after judgment
a copy for the use of the accused person of any record of the
proceedings made by or on behalf of the court.
(8) No person shall be held to be guilty of a criminal offence on
account of any act or omission that did not, at the time it took
place, constitute such an offence, and no penalty shall be imposed
for any criminal offence which is severer in degree or description
than the maximum penalty which might have been imposed for that
offence at the time when it was committed.
(9) No person who shows that he has been tried by any
competent court for a criminal offence and either convicted or
acquitted shall again be tried for that offence or for any other
criminal offence of which he could have been convicted at the trial
for that offence save upon the order of a superior court made in the
course of appeal or review proceedings relating to the conviction or
acquittal; and no person shall be tried for a criminal offence if he
shows that he has been pardoned for that offence:
Provided that nothing in any law shall be held to be
inconsistent with or in contravention of this sub-article by reason
only that it authorises any court to try a member of a disciplined
f o r c e f o r a c r i m i n a l o ff e n c e n o t w i t h s t a n d i n g a n y t r i a l a n d
conviction or acquittal of that member under the disciplinary law of
that force, so however that any court so trying such a member and
convicting him shall in sentencing him to any punishment take into
account any punishment awarded him under that disciplinary law.
(10) No person who is tried for a criminal offence shall be
compelled to give evidence at his trial.
(11) In this article "legal representative" means a person
entitled to practise in Malta as an advocate or, except in relation to
proceedings before a court where a legal procurator has no right of
audience, a legal procurator.

Protection of
freedom of
conscience and
worship.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.12.

40. (1) All persons in Malta shall have full freedom of
conscience and enjoy the free exercise of their respective mode of
religious worship.
(2) No person shall be required to receive instruction in
religion or to show knowledge or proficiency in religion if, in the
case of a person who has not attained the age of sixteen years,
objection to such requirement is made by the person who according
to law has authority over him and, in any other case, if the person
so required objects thereto:
Provided that no such requirement shall be held to be
inconsistent with or in contravention of this article to the extent

19

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
that the knowledge of, or the proficiency or instruction in, religion
is required for the teaching of such religion, or for admission to the
priesthood or to a religious order, or for other religious purposes,
and except so far as that requirement is shown not to be reasonably
justifiable in a democratic society.
(3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of subarticle (1), to the extent that the law in question makes provision
that is reasonably required in the interests of public safety, public
order, public morality or decency, public health, or the protection
of the rights and freedoms of others, and except so far as that
provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority
thereof, is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic
society.
41. (1) Except with his own consent or by way of parental
discipline, no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his
freedom of expression, including freedom to hold opinions without
interference, freedom to receive ideas and information without
interference, freedom to communicate ideas and information
without interference (whether the communication be to the public
generally or to any person or class of persons) and freedom from
interference with his correspondence.
(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of subarticle (1) of this article to the extent that the law in question makes
provision (a) that is reasonably required (i)

in the interests of defence, public safety, public
order, public morality or decency, or public
health; or
(ii) for the purpose of protecting the reputations,
rights and freedoms of other persons, or the
private lives of persons concerned in legal
proceedings, preventing the disclosure of
information received in confidence, maintaining
the authority and independence of the courts,
protecting the privileges of Parliament, or
regulating telephony, telegraphy, posts, wireless
broadcasting, television or other means of
communication, public exhibitions or public
entertainments; or
(b) that imposes restrictions upon public officers,
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing
done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably
justifiable in a democratic society.
(3) Anyone who is resident in Malta may edit or print a
newspaper or journal published daily or periodically:
Provided that provision may be made by law (a) prohibiting or restricting the editing or printing of any

Protection of
freedom of
expression.

20

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
such newspaper or journal by persons under twentyone years of age; and
(b) requiring any person who is the editor or printer of any
such newspaper or journal to inform the prescribed
authority to that effect and of his age and to keep the
prescribed authority informed of his place of
residence.
(4) Where the police seize any edition of a newspaper as being
the means whereby a criminal offence has been committed they
shall within twenty-four hours of the seizure bring the seizure to
the notice of the competent court and if the court is not satisfied
that there is a prima facie case of such offence, that edition shall be
returned to the person from whom it was seized.
(5) No person shall be deprived of his citizenship under any
provisions made under article 30(1) (b) of this Constitution or of
his juridical capacity by reason only of his political opinions.

Protection of
freedom of
assembly and
association.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.13.

42. (1) Except with his own consent or by way of parental
discipline no person shall be hindered in the enjoyment of his
freedom of peaceful assembly and association, that is to say, his
right peacefully to assemble freely and associate with other persons
and in particular to form or belong to trade or other unions or
associations for the protection of his interests.
(2) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this
article to the extent that the law in question makes provision (a) that is reasonably required (i) in the interests of defence, public safety, public
order, public morality or decency, or public
health; or
(ii) for the purpose of protecting the rights or
freedoms of other persons; or
(b) that imposes restrictions upon public officers,
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing
done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably
justifiable in a democratic society.
(3) For the purposes of this article, any provision in any law
prohibiting the holding of public meetings or demonstrations in any
one or more particular cities, towns, suburbs or villages shall be
held to be a provision which is not reasonably justifiable in a
democratic society.

Prohibition of
deportation.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.14.

43. (1) Extradition is only permitted in pursuance
arrangements made by treaty and under the authority of a law.

of

(2) No person shall be extradited for an offence of a political
character.
(3) No citizen of Malta shall be removed from Malta except as
a result of extradition proceedings or under any such law as is
referred to in article 44(3) (b) of this Constitution.

21

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(4) The provisions made by or under the Extradition Act*, as
for the time being in force, for the removal of persons from Malta
to another Commonwealth country to undergo trial or punishment
in that country in respect of an offence committed in that country
and any general arrangements for the extradition of persons
between Commonwealth countries to which Malta for the time
being adheres shall be deemed, for the purposes of sub-article (1)
of this article, to be arrangements made by treaty, and sub-article
(2) shall not apply in relation to the removal or extradition of a
person under such provisions or arrangements.
44. (1) No citizen of Malta shall be deprived of his freedom of
movement, and for the purpose of this article the said freedom
means the right to move freely throughout Malta, the right to reside
in any part of Malta, the right to leave and the right to enter Malta.
(2) Any restriction on a citizen’s freedom of movement that is
involved in his lawful detention shall not be held to be inconsistent
with or in contravention of this article.
(3) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this
article to the extent that the law in question makes provision (a) for the imposition of restrictions that are reasonably
required in the interests of defence, public safety,
public order, public morality or decency, or public
health and except so far as that provision or, as the
case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof
is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a
democratic society;
(b) for the imposition of restrictions on the freedom of
movement of any citizen of Malta who is not a citizen
by virtue of article 3(1) or of article 5(1) of the
Maltese Citizenship Act as in force upon the coming
into force of the Maltese Citizenship (Amendment)
Act, 2000;
(c) for the imposition of restrictions upon the movement
or residence within Malta of public officers; or
(d) for the imposition of restrictions on the right of any
person to leave Malta that are reasonably required in
order to secure the fulfilment of any obligation
imposed on that person by law and except so far as that
provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under
the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably
justifiable in a democratic society.
(4)

For the purposes of this article, any person (a) who has emigrated from Malta (whether before, on or
after the appointed day) and, having been a citizen of
Malta by virtue of article 3(1) or of article 5(1) of the
Maltese Citizenship Act as in force upon the coming

*This Act has replaced the Extradition (Commonwealth Countries) Act, 1970.

Cap. 276.

Protection of
freedom of
movement.
Amended by:
XIII.2001.2.

22

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
into force of the Maltese Citizenship (Amendment)
Act, 2000, has ceased to be such a citizen; or
(b) who emigrated from Malta before the appointed day
and, but for his having ceased to be a citizen of the
United Kingdom and Colonies before that day, would
have become a citizen of Malta by virtue of article 3(1)
of the Maltese Citizenship Act as in force upon the
coming into force of the Maltese Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 2000; or
(c)* who is the spouse of a person mentioned in paragraph
(a) or (b) of this sub-article or of a person who is a
citizen of Malta by virtue of article 3(1) or of article
5(1) of the Maltese Citizenship Act as in force upon
the coming into force of the Maltese Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 2000, and who has been married to
that person for at least five years and is living with that
person, or is the child under twenty-one years of age of
such a person; or
(d) who is the widow or the widower of a person
mentioned in paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of this
subarticle or of a person who at the time of his or her
death was a citizen of Malta by virtue of article 3(1) or
of article 5(1) of the Maltese Citizenship Act as in
force upon the coming into force of the Maltese
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2000, and who was still
living with him or her at the time of his or her death
and had been married to that person for at least five
years or who would, but for the death of that person,
have been so married for at least five years, or is the
child under twenty-one years of age of such a person,
shall be deemed to be a citizen of Malta by virtue of article 3(1) or
of article 5(1) of the Maltese Citizenship Act as in force upon the
coming into force of the Maltese Citizenship (Amendment) Act,
2000:
Provided that if the Minister responsible for matters
relating to Maltese citizenship at any time by order declares that it
is contrary to the public interest that a spouse as is mentioned in
paragraph (c), or a widow or widower as is mentioned in paragraph
(d), or a child over eighteen years of age as is mentioned in
paragraph (c) or (d) is to be so deemed, or to continue to be so
deemed, such spouse, widow, widower or child, as the case may be,
shall thereupon cease to be deemed to be a citizen of Malta as
aforesaid:
Provided further that the Minister responsible for matters
relating to Maltese citizenship shall not be required to assign any
reason for the issue of any order referred to in the immediately
preceding proviso, and the decision of the Minister on any such
order shall not be subject to appeal to or review in any court.

*see article 5 of Act XIII of 2001 .

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

23

(5) If any person whose freedom of movement has been
restricted by virtue of such a provision as is referred to in subarticle (3)(a) of this article so requests at any time during the
period of that restriction not earlier than six months after the order
was made or six months after he last made such request, as the case
may be, his case shall be reviewed by an independent and impartial
tribunal established by law composed of a person or persons each
of whom holds or has held judicial office or is qualified to be
appointed to such office in Malta:
Provided that a person whose freedom of movement has
been restricted by virtue of a restriction which is applicable to
persons generally or to general classes of persons shall not make a
request under this sub-article unless he has first obtained the
consent of the Civil Court, First Hall.
(6) On any review by a tribunal in pursuance of this article of
the case of a person whose freedom of movement has been
restricted the tribunal may make recommendations concerning the
necessity or expediency of continuing the restriction to the
authority by which it was ordered but, unless it is otherwise
provided by law, that authority shall not be obliged to act in
accordance with any such recommendations.
45. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-articles (4), (5) and
(7 ) o f t hi s a rt i cle , n o law shal l m ak e any pr ov is io n th at i s
discriminatory either of itself or in its effect.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-articles (6), (7) and (8) of
this article, no person shall be treated in a discriminatory manner
by any person acting by virtue of any written law or in the
performance of the functions of any public office or any public
authority.
(3) In this article, the expression "discriminatory" means
affording different treatment to different persons attributable
wholly or mainly to their respective descriptions by race, place of
origin, political opinions, colour, creed, sex, sexual orientation or
gender identity whereby persons of one such description are
subjected to disabilities or restrictions to which persons of another
such description are not made subject or are accorded privileges or
advantages which are not accorded to persons of another such
description.
(4) Sub-article (1) of this article shall not apply to any law so
far as that law makes provision (a) for the appropriation of public revenues or other public
funds; or
(b) with respect to persons who are not citizens of Malta;
or
(c) with respect to adoption, marriage, dissolution of
marriage, burial, devolution of property on death or
any matters of personal law not hereinbefore specified;
or
(d) whereby persons of any such description as is

Protection from
discrimination on
the grounds of
race, etc.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.15;
XIX.1991.3;
X.2014.3.

24

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
mentioned in sub-article (3) of this article may be
subjected to any disability or restriction or may be
accorded any privilege or advantage which, having
regard to its nature and to special circumstances
pertaining to those persons or to persons of any other
such description and to any other provision of this
Constitution, is reasonably justifiable in a democratic
society; or
(e) for authorising the taking during a period of public
emergency of measures that are reasonably justifiable
for the purpose of dealing with the situation that exists
during that period of public emergency;
Provided that paragraph (c) of this sub-article shall not
apply to any law which makes any provision that is discriminatory,
either of itself or in its effect by affording different treatment to
different persons attributable wholly or mainly to their respective
description by sex.
(5) Nothing contained in any law shall be held to be
inconsistent with or in contravention of sub-article (1) of this
article to the extent that it makes provision:
(a) with respect to qualifications for service or conditions
of service in any disciplined force; or
(b) with respect to qualifications (not being qualifications
specifically relating to sex, sexual orientation or
gender identity) for service as a public officer or for
service of a local government authority or a body
corporate established for public purposes by any law.
(6) Sub-article (2) of this article shall not apply to anything
which is expressly or by necessary implication authorised to be
done by any such provision of law as is referred to in sub-article (4)
or (5) of this article.
(7) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this
article to the extent that the law in question makes provision (not
being provisions specifically relating to sex) whereby persons of
any such description as is mentioned in sub-article (3) of this
article may be subjected to any restriction on the rights and
freedoms guaranteed by articles 38, 40, 41, 42 and 44 of this
Constitution, being such a restriction as is authorised by article
38(2), 40(2), 41(2), 42(2) or 44(3).
(8) Nothing in sub-article (2) of this article shall affect any
discretion relating to the institution, conduct or discontinuance of
civil or criminal proceedings in any court that is vested in any
person by or under this Constitution or any other law.
(9) A requirement, however made, that the Roman Catholic
Apostolic Religion shall be taught by a person professing that
religion shall not be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention
of this article.
(10) Until the expiration of a period of two years commencing

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

25

on the lst July, 1991, nothing contained in any law made before the
1st July, 1991, shall be held to be inconsistent with the provisions
of this article, in so far as that law provides for different treatment
t o d i ff e r e n t p e r s o n s a t t r i b u t a b l e w h o l l y o r m a i n l y t o t h e i r
respective description by sex.
(11) Nothing in the provisions of this article shall apply to any
law or anything done under the authority of a law, or to any
procedure or arrangement, in so far as such law, thing done,
procedure or arrangement provides for the taking of special
measures aimed at accelerating de facto equality between men and
women, and in so far only as such measures, taking into account the
social fabric of Malta, are shown to be reasonably justifiable in a
democratic society.
46. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-articles (6) and (7) of
this article, any person who alleges that any of the provisions of
articles 33 to 45 (inclusive) of this Constitution has been, is being
or is likely to be contravened in relation to him, or such other
person as the Civil Court, First Hall, in Malta may appoint at the
instance of any person who so alleges, may, without prejudice to
any other action with respect to the same matter that is lawfully
available, apply to the Civil Court, First Hall, for redress.
(2) The Civil Court, First Hall, shall have original jurisdiction
to hear and determine any application made by any person in
pursuance of sub-article (1) of this article, and may make such
orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider
appropriate for the purpose of enforcing, or securing the
enforcement of, any of the provisions of the said articles 33 to 45
(inclusive) to the protection of which the person concerned is
entitled:
Provided that the Court may, if it considers it desirable so to
do, decline to exercise its powers under this sub-article in any case
where it is satisfied that adequate means of redress for the
contravention alleged are or have been available to the person
concerned under any other law.
(3) If in any proceedings in any court other than the Civil
Court, First Hall, or the Constitutional Court any question arises as
to the contravention of any of the provisions of the said articles 33
to 45 (inclusive), that court shall refer the question to the Civil
Court, First Hall, unless in its opinion the raising of the question is
merely frivolous or vexatious; and that court shall give its decision
on any question referred to it under this sub-article and, subject to
the provisions of sub-article (4) of this article, the court in which
the question arose shall dispose of the question in accordance with
that decision.
(4) Any party to proceedings brought in the Civil Court, First
Hall, in pursuance of this article shall have a right of appeal to the
Constitutional Court.
(5) No appeal shall lie from any determination under this
article that any application or the raising of any question is merely
frivolous or vexatious.

Enforcement of
protective
provisions.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.16.

26

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(6) Provision may be made by or under an Act of Parliament
for conferring upon the Civil Court, First Hall, such powers in
addition to those conferred by this article as are necessary or
desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more effectively to
exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by this article.
(7) Rules of Court making provision with respect to the
practice and procedure of the Courts of Malta for the purposes of
this article may be made by the person or authority for the time
being having power to make rules of court with respect to the
practice and procedure of those Courts, and shall be designed to
secure that the procedure shall be by application and that the
hearing shall be as expeditious as possible.

Interpretation of
Chapter IV.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.17;
XIX.1991.4;
XVI.2022.5.

47. (1) In this Chapter, save where the context otherwise
requires, the following expressions shall have the following
meanings respectively, that is to say "contravention", in relation to any requirement, includes a failure
to comply with that requirement, and cognate expressions shall be
construed accordingly;
"court" means any court of law in Malta other than a court
constituted by or under a disciplinary law and in articles 33 and 35
of this Constitution includes, in relation to an offence against a
disciplinary law, a court so constituted;
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline (a) of any disciplined force; or
(b) of persons serving prison sentences;
"disciplined force" means (a) a naval, military or air force of the Government of
Malta;
(b) the Malta Police Force;
(c) any other police force established by law in Malta;
(d) the Malta prison service;
(e) the Assistance and Rescue Force within the Civil
Protection Department;
"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person
who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject
to that discipline.
(2) In this Chapter "period of public emergency" means any
period during which (a) Malta is engaged in any war; or
(b) there is in force a proclamation by the President
declaring that a state of public emergency exists; or
(c) there is in force a resolution of the House of
Representatives supported by the votes of not less than
two-thirds of all the Members of the House declaring
that democratic institutions in Malta are threatened by
subversion.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(3) (a) Where any proclamation of emergency has been made,
the occasion therefor shall forthwith be communicated to the House
of Representatives and, if the House is then separated by such
adjournment or prorogation as will not expire within ten days the
President shall by proclamation summon it to meet within five days
and it shall accordingly meet and sit upon the day appointed by the
proclamation and shall continue to sit and act as if it had stood
adjourned or prorogued to that day.
(b) A proclamation of emergency shall, unless it is sooner
revoked by the President, cease to be in force at the expiration of a
period of fourteen days beginning on the date on which it was made
or such longer period as may be provided under the next following
pa r a g r a p h , b ut w it h o u t p r e j u d ic e t o t h e m a k in g of a no t h e r
proclamation of emergency at or before the end of that period.
(c) If at any time while a proclamation of emergency is in force
(including any time while it is in force by virtue of this paragraph)
a resolution is passed by the House of Representatives approving
its continuance in force for a further period, not exceeding three
months, beginning on the date on which it would otherwise expire,
the proclamation shall, if not sooner revoked, continue in force for
that further period.
(4) A resolution such as is referred to in paragraph (c) of subarticle (2) of this article shall, unless it is sooner revoked by the
House of Representatives, cease to be in force at the expiration of
twelve months beginning on the date on which it was passed or
such shorter period as may be specified therein, but without
prejudice to the passing of another resolution by the House of
Representatives in the manner prescribed by that paragraph at or
before the end of that period.
(5) In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined
force raised under any law in force in Malta, nothing contained in
or done under the authority of the disciplinary law of that force
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of any of
the provisions of this Chapter other than articles 33, 35 and 36.
(6) In relation to any person who is a member of a disciplined
force raised otherwise than as aforesaid and lawfully present in
Malta, nothing contained in or done under the authority of the
disciplinary law of that force shall be held to be inconsistent with
or in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter.
(7) Until the expiration of a period ending on the 30th June,
1993, nothing contained in any such law as is specified in the First
Schedule to this Constitution and, until the expiration of a period of
three years commencing with the appointed day, nothing contained
in any other law made before the appointed day shall be held to be
inconsistent with the provisions of articles 33 to 45 (inclusive) of
this Chapter and, subject as aforesaid, nothing done under the
authority of any such law shall be held to be done in contravention
of those articles.
(8) Where any provision of law enacted before the appointed
day is held to be inconsistent with any of the provisions of articles
33 to 45 (inclusive) of this Chapter, no person shall be entitled to

27

28

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
compensation in respect of anything done under the authority of
that provision before it was so held to be inconsistent.
(9) Nothing in article 37 of this Constitution shall affect the
operation of any law in force immediately before 3rd March 1962
or any law made on or after that date that amends or replaces any
law in force immediately before that date (or such a law as from
time to time amended or replaced in the manner described in this
sub-article) and that does not (a) add to the kinds of property that may be taken
possession of or the rights over and interests in
property that may be acquired;
(b) add to the purposes for which or circumstances in
which such property may be taken possession of or
acquired;
(c) make the conditions governing entitlement to
compensation or the amount thereof less favourable to
any person owning or interested in the property; or
(d) deprive any person of any right such as is mentioned in
paragraph (b) or paragraph (c) of article 37(1) of this
Constitution.
CHAPTER V

Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.18.

The President
Establishment of
the office of
President.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.18.
Amended by:
XLIV.2020.2.

*

48. (1)
There shall be a President of Malta who shall be
appointed by Resolution supported by the votes of not less than twothirds of all the members of the House:
Provided that notwithstanding the provisions of sub-article
(3)(a), if the Resolution is not supported by the votes of not less than
two-thirds of all the members of the House, the person occupying the
office of the President of Malta shall, in any circumstance, remain in
office until the Resolution is supported by the votes of not less than twothirds of all the members of the House.
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed to the office
of President if (a) he is not a citizen of Malta; or
(b) he holds or has held the office of Chief Justice or other
Judge of the Superior Courts; or
(c) he is not eligible for appointment to or to act in any
public office in accordance with articles 109, 118 and
120 of this Constitution.
(3)

The office of President shall become vacant (a) on the expiration of five years from the date of the
appointment to that office; or
(b) if the holder of the office is removed upon an address
by the House supported by the votes of not less than

*Note: sub-article (4) of this article has been omitted as it has had its effect.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

29

two-thirds of all the members thereof and praying for
such removal on the grounds of proved inability to
perform functions of his office (whether arising from
infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or
proved misbehaviour:
Provided that Parliament may by law regulate the
procedure for the presentation of an address and for the
investigation and proof of the inability or misbehaviour
of the holder of the office under the provisions of this
paragraph.
49. Whenever the office of President is temporarily vacant, and
until a new President is appointed, and whenever the holder of the
office is absent from Malta or on vacation or is for any reason
unable to perform the functions conferred upon him by this
Constitution, those functions shall be performed by such person as
the Prime Minister, after consultation with the Leader of the
Opposition, may appoint or, if there is no person in Malta so
appointed and able to perform those functions, by the Speaker of
the House of Representatives.
*50.

A person appointed to or assuming the functions of the
office of President shall, before entering upon that office, take and
subscribe the oath of office set out in the Second Schedule to this
Constitution. Any person appointed to the office of President under
sub-article (1) of article 48 of this Constitution shall take the oath
of office before the House.

Discharge of
President’s
functions during
vacancy, etc.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.18.
Amended by:
XLII. 2016.20.

Oath to be taken by
the President.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.18.

CHAPTER VI

Parliament
PART 1
Composition of Parliament
51. There shall be a Parliament of Malta which shall consist of
the President and a House of Representatives.

*The reference to sub-article (4) of article 48 has been omitted in view of the omission
of that sub-article.

Establishment of
Parliament.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.19.

30
Composition of the
House of
Representatives.
Amended by:
XXVI. 1970.2.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.20.
Amended by:
IV.1987.3;
XI.1996.2;
XXI.2007.4.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
52. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the House of
Representatives shall consist of such number of members, being an
odd number and divisible by the number of electoral divisions, as
Parliament shall from time to time by law determine. Such
members shall be elected in the manner provided by or under any
law for the time being in force in Malta in equal proportions from
the electoral divisions referred to in article 56 of this Constitution,
each division returning such number of members, being not less
than five and not more than seven as Parliament shall from time to
time by law determine; and such members shall be known as
"Members of Parliament":
Provided that where (i)

at any general election, a political party
(hereinafter referred to in this article as the
"absolute majority party") obtains in the
aggregate more than fifty per centum of all the
valid votes cast at that election, as credited to its
candidates by the Electoral Commission at the
first count of all the votes; or
(ii) at a general election which is contested by more
than two political parties and in which only
candidates of two of such parties are elected, a
political party obtains a percentage of all the
valid votes cast at such election, as credited to
its candidates by the Electoral Commission at
the first count of all the votes (hereinafter also
referred to in this article as the "relative majority
party"), which is greater than that obtained by
any one other party (hereinafter referred to in
this article as the "minority party"),

Cap. 354.

and the proportion which the number of the elected candidates
credited to the absolute majority party or to the relative majority
party (as the case may be) represents in relation to the total number
of elected members of the House of Representatives is less than the
proportion which the number of votes credited to such candidates at
the first count of all the votes represents in relation to the total of
the votes credited at the same first count of all the votes to all the
candidates of all the parties electing candidates, the number of the
elected candidates of such party shall be increased (as the case may
be) by a number of additional candidates in the circumstances as
determined by and in accordance with the provisions of Part IV of
the General Elections (Sorting of Ballot Papers, Casual Elections
and Co-opting) Regulations in the Thirteenth Schedule to the
General Elections Act and the Annex to such Schedule (hereinafter
referred to as "the relevant regulations") as in force on 30th
September 2007 or as subsequently amended or substituted in the
manner provided in sub-article (3):
Provided further that:
(i)

in the eventuality of an election result as
provided for in sub-paragraph (i) of the first
proviso to this subarticle but provided there is

31

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
only one minority party; or
(ii) in the eventuality of an election result as
provided for in sub-paragraph (ii) of the first
proviso to this sub-article,
and the proportion which the number of elected candidates credited
to the minority party represents in relation to the total number of
elected members of the House of Representatives is less than the
proportion which the number of votes credited to all its candidates
at the first count of all the votes represents in relation to the total of
the votes credited at the same first count of all the votes to all the
candidates of all the parties electing candidates, the number of the
elected candidates of the minority party shall be increased by a
number of additional candidates as determined by the relevant
regulations as in force on 30th September 2007 or as subsequently
amended or substituted in the manner provided in sub-article (3).
In any case as forseen in the first and second proviso to this
sub-article, such persons shall be declared by the Electoral
Commission to be elected to fill the additional seats created by the
said provisos who, being candidates of the party which is to be
credited with the additional seats, were credited by the Electoral
Commission at the last count with the highest or next higher
number of votes without being elected, irrespective of the division
in which such highest or higher number of votes occurs.
(2) If any person who is not a member of the House of
Representatives is elected to be Speaker of the House he shall, by
virtue of holding the office of Speaker, be a member of the House
in addition to the other members:
Provided that in any such case the Speaker shall not be
treated as a member of the House for the purpose of establishing
the number of votes required to support a bill for any of the
purposes of article 66 of this Constitution.
(3) The provisions of Part IV of the General Elections (Sorting
of Ballot Papers, Casual Elections and Co-opting) Regulations, in
the Thirteenth Schedule to the General Elections Act and the Annex
to such Schedule, as in force on the coming into force of this subarticle may only be deleted, amended or substituted by a bill for an
Act of Parliament passed in the manner specified in sub-article (2)
of article 66 of this Constitution.
52A. (1) If at a general election which is contested by two or
more political parties and in which only candidates of two parties are
elected or in the eventuality of an election result as provided for in
sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of the proviso to sub-article (1) of article 52
and in the event that the number of Members of Parliament of the
under-represented sex, elected by virtue of article 52, inclusive of
those members elected at a casual election in terms of the relevant
regulations, is less than forty per cent (40%) of all the Members of
Parliament, then the number of Members of Parliament shall increase
by not more than twelve (12) Members of the under-represented sex:
Provided that the number of Members of Parliament of the

Cap. 354.

Additional seats
for underrepresented sex.
Added by:
XX.2021.3.

32

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
under-represented sex elected by virtue of article 52 added to the
members of the under-represented sex elected by virtue of this article
shall not exceed forty per cent (40%) of the total number of elected
Members of Parliament making up the House.
The candidates elected by virtue of this article are to be
apportioned equally between the absolute majority party or the relative
majority party and the minority party.
(2)
Such candidate or candidates belonging to the underrepresented sex and who are candidates of the party or parties which
shall be credited with the additional seats, and which were credited by
the Electoral Commission at the last count with the highest or next
higher number of votes without being elected, irrespective of the
division in which such highest or next higher number of votes occur,
shall be declared by the Electoral Commission as elected to fill the
additional seats created by sub-article (1):
Provided that in the event that the number of candidates
established under this article is not reached, following the application
of the preceding sub-article, such candidates belonging to the underrepresented sex shall be declared by the Electoral Commission to be
elected to fill the remaining additional seats created by this article
who, being candidates of the party which is to be credited with the
additional seats, were ranked on a national basis by the Electoral
Commission with the highest or next higher number of percentage
quota obtained on the basis of their respective final count vote before
elimination in relation to the quota of the electoral division contested:
Provided further that in the event that the number of
candidates established under this article is not reached as foreseen in
this sub-article, the seats thereafter remaining vacant shall be filled by
the co-option of a Member or Members by the House and such
Member or Members shall be qualified to be elected as a Member of
the House as established under article 53, shall not be subject to any
disqualifications for membership of the House as provided under
article 54 and shall belong to the under-represented sex.
(3)
For the purpose of this article, elected and unelected
candidates who are identified as gender-neutral persons in their official
documentation, shall be counted with the under-represented sex.
(4) This article shall remain in force until the expiry of the period
of twenty (20) years from the date of its coming into force, unless
revoked or re-enacted with or without modification by means of an Act
of Parliament according to the provisions of this Constitution.

Qualifications for
membership of
House of
Representatives.
Amended by:
IV.2018.3.

53. Subject to the provisions of article 54 of this Constitution,
a person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the House
of Representatives if, and shall not be qualified to be so elected
unless, that person has attained the age of eighteen years and he has the

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

33

qualifications for registration as a voter for the election of members
of the House of Representatives mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (c)
of article 57 of this Constitution.
54. (1) No person shall be qualified to be elected as a member
of the House of Representatives (a) if he is a citizen of a country other than Malta having
become such a citizen voluntarily or is under a
declaration of allegiance to such a country;
(b) save as otherwise provided by Parliament, if he holds
or is acting in any public office or is a member of the
armed forces of the Government of Malta;
(c) if he is a party to, or is a partner with unlimited
liability in a partnership or a director or manager of a
company which is a party to, a contract with the
Government of Malta being a contract of works or a
contract for the supply of merchandise to be used in
the service of the public and has not, within one month
before the date of election, published in the Gazette a
notice setting out the nature of any such contract, and
his interest, or the interest of any such partnership or
company, therein;
(d) if he is an undischarged bankrupt, having been
adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any
law in force in Malta;
(e) if he is interdicted or incapacitated for any mental
infirmity or for prodigality by a court in Malta, or is
otherwise determined in Malta to be of unsound mind;
(f)

if he is under sentence of death imposed on him by any
court in Malta or is serving a sentence of
imprisonment (by whatever name called), exceeding
twelve months imposed on him by such a court or
substituted by competent authority for some other
sentence imposed on him by such a court;

(g) if he holds or is acting in any office the functions of
which involve any responsibility for, or in connection
with, the conduct of any election of members of the
House of Representatives or the compilation or
revision of any electoral register;
(h) if he is disqualified for membership of the House of
Representatives by or under any law for the time being
in force in Malta by reason of his having been
convicted of any offence connected with the election
of members of the House of Representatives;
(i)

if he has not yet attained the age of eighteen years.

(2) For the purposes of paragraph (f) of sub-article (1) of this
article (a) two or more sentences that are required to be served
consecutively shall be regarded as separate sentences
if none of them exceeds twelve months, but if any one

Disqualifications
for membership of
House of
Representatives.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.21;
XXXVIII.1976.2;
XXI.2007.5;
IV.2018.4.

34

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
of them exceeds that term they shall be regarded as
one sentence; and
(b) no account shall be taken of a sentence of
imprisonment imposed as an alternative to, or in
default of, the payment of a fine.
(3) A person shall not be treated as holding, or acting in, a
public office for the purpose of paragraph (b) of sub-article (1) of
this article (a) if he is on leave of absence pending relinquishment of
a public office;
(b) if he is a teacher at the University of Malta who is not
by the terms of his employment prevented from the
private practice of his profession or called upon to
place his whole time at the disposal of the Government
of Malta.

Tenure of office of
members.
Amended by:
XXXVIII.1976.3;
XXIV.2015.46.

55. (1) The seat of a member of Parliament shall become
vacant(a) upon the next dissolution of Parliament after his
election;
(b) if he resigns his seat by writing under his hand
addressed to the Speaker or, if the office of Speaker is
vacant or the Speaker is absent from Malta, to the
Deputy Speaker;
(c) if he becomes a party to a contract with the
Government of Malta being a contract of works or a
contract for the supply of merchandise to be used in
the service of the public, or if any partnership in which
he is a partner with unlimited liability or a company of
which he is a director or manager becomes a party to
any such contract, or if he becomes a partner with
unlimited liability in a partnership or a director or
manager of a company that is a party to any such
contract:
Provided that he shall not vacate his seat under the
provisions of this paragraph if before becoming a party
to the contract or before, or as soon as practicable
after, becoming otherwise interested in the contract
(whether as a partner with unlimited liability in a
partnership or as a director or manager of a company)
he discloses to the Speaker the nature of the contract
and his interest or the interest of the partnership or
company therein and the House of Representatives by
resolution exempts him from the provisions of this
paragraph;
(d) if he is absent from the sittings of the House of
Representatives for such period and in such
circumstances as may be prescribed by the Standing
Orders of the House;
(e) if he ceases to be a citizen of Malta;

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(f)

35

if he ceases to be qualified for registration as a voter
for the election of members of the House of
Representatives;

(ff) if the Constitutional Court decides that an elected
candidate has given information which is false in the
return of election expenses or that an elected candidate
has incurred election expenses in an amount exceeding
the amount permissible by law;
(g) subject to the provisions of sub-article (2) of this
article, if any circumstances arise that if he were not a
member of the House of Representatives, would cause
him to be disqualified for election thereto.
(2) (a) If circumstances such as are referred to in paragraph (g)
of sub-article (1) of this article arise because any member of the
House of Representatives is under sentence of death or
imprisonment, interdicted or incapacitated or adjudged to be of
unsound mind, adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt or
convicted of an offence connected with elections and if it is open to
the member to appeal against the decision (either with the leave of
a court or other authority or without such leave), he shall forthwith
cease to perform his functions as a member of the House but,
subject to the provisions of this article, he shall not vacate his seat
until the expiration of a period of thirty days thereafter:
Provided that the Speaker may, from time to time, extend
that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member
to pursue an appeal against the decision, so however that
extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty
d a y s sh a l l n o t b e g i v e n wi t h o u t t h e ap p r o va l , s i g n i f i e d b y
resolution, of the House.
(b) If, on the determination of any appeal, such circumstances
continue to exist and no further appeal is open to the member, or if,
by reason of the expiration of any period for entering an appeal or
notice thereof or the refusal of leave to appeal or for any other
reason, it ceases to be open to the member to appeal, he shall
forthwith vacate his seat.
(c) If at any time before the member vacates his seat such
circumstances as aforesaid cease to exist, his seat shall not become
vacant on the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph (a)
of this sub-article and he may resume the performance of his
functions as a member of the House of Representatives.
(d) For the purposes of this sub-article "appeal" means, in the
case of an order by a court of voluntary jurisdiction for the
interdiction or incapacitation of a member of the House of
Representatives, the taking of any action for the review of that
order before the Civil Court, First Hall.
56. (1) The members of the House of Representatives shall be
elected upon the principle of proportional representation by means
of the single transferable vote from such number of electoral
divisions, being an odd number and not less than nine and not more
than fifteen, as Parliament shall from time to time determine.

Voting at Elections.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.22.
Amended by:
IV.1987.4;
XXI.2007.6.

36

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(2) The election of members of the House of Representatives
shall be free of illegal or corrupt practices and foreign interference.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Electoral Commission to suspend
the election, either in all electoral divisions or in any one or more
of such divisions, if it has reasonable ground to believe that illegal
or corrupt practices or other offences connected with the elections
have been committed or there has been foreign interference and
such practices, offences or interference have so extensively
prevailed or have been of such nature that they may reasonably be
expected to affect the result of the election, in all or in any one or
more of the electoral divisions.
(4) In any case in which an election is suspended under subarticle (3) of this article, the Chief Electoral Commissioner shall
forthwith refer the matter to the Constitutional Court for its
decision.
(5) Where any of the grounds on which an election may be
suspended under sub-article (3) of this article exist and the election
has not been suspended, or where illegal or corrupt practices or
other offences or foreign interference as are referred to in that subarticle may reasonably be supposed to have affected the result of an
election, in all or in any one or more of the electoral divisions, any
person entitled to vote at that election may, not later than three days
after the publication of the official result of the election, refer the
matter to the Constitutional Court for its decision.
(6) Any reference to the Constitutional Court under either subarticle (4) or sub-article (5) of this article shall be made and shall
be determined by that Court in accordance with any law for the
time being in force in Malta. On any such reference the Court shall,
without prejudice to any other powers, have power to annul the
election, in all or in any one or more of the electoral divisions, on
any of the grounds mentioned in the said sub-articles, and to give
such directions and orders and to provide such redress and other
remedies as it may deem appropriate in the circumstances and in
particular to ensure that a free election, in place of any one that
may have been annulled, be held at the earliest possible
opportunity.
(7) Where an election has been annulled under sub-article (6)
of this article, the result of the election shall not be complete before
the publication of the official result of a valid election in all
electoral divisions.
(8) Except by a bill for an Act of Parliament passed in the
manner specified in sub-article (2) of article 66 of this
Constitution, no alteration in any law shall be made (a) whereby any act or omission shall cease to be an
illegal or corrupt practice or other offence relating to
the election of members of the House of
Representatives or foreign interference; or
(b) which alters or adds to the circumstances or conditions
in which or under which an act or omission is such a
practice or other offence or foreign interference; or

37

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(c) reduces the punishment to which from time to time any
such practice or other offence or interference renders
the offender liable;
and for the purposes of this sub-article the provisions of sub-article
(7) of article 66 of this Constitution shall apply as if references to
the alteration to any of the provisions of this Constitution were
references to the alteration of any law.
(9) No person shall vote at the election of members of the
House of Representatives for any electoral division who is not
registered under any law for the time being in force in Malta as a
voter in that division.
(10) At the election
Representatives-

of

members

of

the

House

of

(a) voting shall be by ballot and shall be carried out in
such a manner as not to disclose the way in which the
vote of any particular voter is given; and
(b) no person shall be permitted to vote on behalf of
another:
Provided that provision may be made by law
whereby, if a person is unable, by reason of blindness,
other physical cause or illiteracy to mark on his ballot
paper, his ballot paper may be marked on his behalf
and on his directions by some other person officially
supervising the poll at the place of voting.
Provided that where a person is by reason of blindness
unable to mark on his ballot paper, provision may be made by law
requiring that at the request of any such person adequate and
special means are to be provided which will enable that person to
mark on his ballot paper independently and without the need of
assistance.
(11) Ballot papers shall be drawn up in such a manner as to
enable illiterates to distinguish between the political parties to
which candidates belong.
(12) Candidates and their agents shall be given facilities to
watch the transportation of ballot boxes and the sealing and
unsealing thereof.
(13) The expressions "corrupt practice", "offences connected
with the election of members of the House of Representatives" and
"foreign interference" have the meaning assigned to them by a law
for the time being in force regulating the conduct of elections or
foreign interference with respect to elections, and any such law
shall be deemed for the purposes of this article and of articles 32 to
47 (inclusive) of this Constitution to be reasonably required in the
interest of public order and reasonably justifiable in a democratic
society.
57. Subject to the provisions of article 58 of this Constitution,
a person shall be qualified to be registered as a voter for the
election of members of the House of Representatives if, and shall

Qualification of
voters.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.23.
IV.2018.5.

38

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
not be qualified to be so registered unless (a) he is a citizen of Malta;
(b) he has attained the age of sixteen years; and
(c) he is resident in Malta and has during the eighteen
months immediately preceding his registration been a
resident for a continuous period of six months or for
periods amounting in the aggregate to six months:
Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a person
who is ordinarily resident in Malta but has not been
resident in Malta as required by this paragraph by
reason of service abroad in the public service,
including service in the offices referred to in subarticle (3) of article 124 of this Constitution, or by
reason of service abroad in, or as a member of, a
disciplined force as defined in article 47 of this
Constitution.

Disqualification of
voters.
Amended by:
VII.2014.3.

58. No person shall be qualified to be registered as a voter for
the election of members of the House of Representatives if (a) he is interdicted or incapacitated for any mental
infirmity by a court in Malta or is otherwise
determined in Malta to be of unsound mind;
(b) he is under sentence of death imposed on him by any
court in Malta or is serving a sentence of
imprisonment (by whatever name called) exceeding
twelve months imposed on him by such a court or
substituted by competent authority for some other
sentence imposed on him by such a court; or
(c) he is disqualified for registration as a voter by or under
any law for the time being in force in Malta by reason
of his having been convicted of any offence connected
with the election of members of the House of
Representatives.

Speaker and
Deputy Speaker.

59. (1) When the House of Representatives first meets after
any general election and before it proceeds to the despatch of any
other business, it shall elect a person to be the Speaker of the
House; and if the office of Speaker falls vacant at any time before
the next dissolution of Parliament, the House shall, as soon as
practicable, elect another person to that office.
(2)

The Speaker may be elected either (a) from among persons who are members of the House of
Representatives,
but
are
not
Ministers
or
Parliamentary Secretaries, or
(b) from among persons who are not members of the
House of Representatives and are qualified for election
as members thereof.

(3) When the House of Representatives first meets after any
general election and before it proceeds to the despatch of any other
business except the election of the Speaker, the House shall elect a

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
member of the House, who is not a Minister or a Parliamentary
Secretary, to be Deputy Speaker of the House; and if the office of
Deputy Speaker falls vacant at any time before the next dissolution
of Parliament, the House shall, as soon as convenient, elect another
such member to that office.
(4) A person shall vacate the office of Speaker or Deputy
Speaker (a) in the case of a Speaker elected from among the
members of the House of Representatives or in the
case of the Deputy Speaker (i) if he ceases to be a member of the House:
Provided that the Speaker shall not vacate his
office by reason only that he has ceased to be a
member of the House on a dissolution of
Parliament, until the House first meets after that
dissolution;
(ii) if he is appointed to be a Minister or a
Parliamentary Secretary;
(b) in the case of a Speaker elected from among persons
who are not members of the House of Representatives(i) when the House first meets after any dissolution
of Parliament;
(ii) if any circumstances arise that would cause him
to be disqualified for election as a member of the
House of Representatives;
(c) if he announces his resignation of his office to the
House of Representatives or if by writing under his
hand addressed, in the case of the Speaker to the Clerk
of the House and in the case of the Deputy Speaker to
the Speaker (or, if the office of Speaker is vacant or
the Speaker is absent from Malta, to the Clerk of the
House) he resigns that office; or
(d) in the case of the Deputy Speaker, if he is elected to be
Speaker.
(5) (a) If, by virtue of sub-article (2) of article 55 of this
Constitution, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker is required to cease to
perform his functions as a member of the House of Representatives
he shall also cease to perform his functions as Speaker or Deputy
Speaker, as the case may be, and those functions shall until he
vacates his seat in the House or resumes the performance of the
functions of his office, be performed (i)

in the case of the Speaker, by the Deputy
Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is
vacant or the Deputy Speaker is required to
cease to perform his functions as a member of
the House of Representatives by virtue of subarticle (2) of article 55 of this Constitution, by
such member of the House (not being a Minister
or Parliamentary Secretary) as the House may
elect for the purpose;

39

40

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(ii)

in the case of the Deputy Speaker, by such
member of the House (not being a Minister or
Parliamentary Secretary) as the House may elect
for the purpose.

(b) If the Speaker or Deputy Speaker resumes the
performance of his functions as a member of the House, in
accordance with the provisions of sub-article (2) of article 55 of
this Constitution, he shall also resume the performance of his
functions of Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
Establishment of
Electoral
Commission.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.24.

60. (1) There shall be an Electoral Commission for Malta.
(2) The Electoral Commission shall consist of a Chairman, who
shall be the person for the time being holding the office of Chief
Electoral Commissioner and who shall be appointed to that office
from the public service, and such number of members not being
less than four as may be prescribed by any law for the time being in
force in Malta.
(3) The members of the Electoral Commission shall be
appointed by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of
the Prime Minister, given after he has consulted the Leader of the
Opposition.
(4) A person shall not be qualified to hold office as a member
of the Electoral Commission if he is a Minister, a Parliamentary
Secretary, a member of, or a candidate for election to, the House of
Representatives or a public officer.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this article, a member of the
Electoral Commission shall vacate his office (a) at the expiration of three years from the date of his
appointment or at such earlier time as may be specified
in the instrument by which he was appointed; or
(b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a
member of the Commission, would cause him to be
disqualified for appointment as such.
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-article (7) of this article, a
member of the Electoral Commission may be removed from office
by the President acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime
Minister.
(7) A member of the Electoral Commission shall not be
removed from office except for inability to discharge the functions
of his office (whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any
other cause) or for misbehaviour.
(8) If the office of a member of the Electoral Commission is
vacant or if a member is for any reason unable to perform the
functions of his office, the President, acting in accordance with the
advice of the Prime Minister, given after he has consulted the
Leader of the Opposition, may appoint a person who is qualified to
be appointed to be a member to be a temporary member of the
Commission; and any person so appointed shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-articles (5), (6) and (7) of this article cease to be
such a member when a person has been appointed to fill the

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

41

vacancy or, as the case may be, when the member who was unable
to perform the functions of his office resumes those functions.
(9) In the exercise of its functions under this Constitution the
Electoral Commission shall not be subject to the direction or
control of any other person or authority.
61. (1) The Electoral Commission shall review the boundaries
of the electoral divisions referred to in article 56(1) of this
Constitution at intervals of not less than two nor more than five
years and may, in accordance with the provisions of this article,
alter such boundaries to such extent as it considers desirable in the
light of the review:
Provided that the Commission shall carry out such a review
and, in accordance with the provisions of this article, alter the said
boundaries whenever Parliament has made provision altering the
number of electoral divisions; and in addition the Commission may
at any time carry out such a review and, in accordance with the
provisions of this article, alter the said boundaries to such extent as
it considers desirable in consequence of the holding of a census of
the population in pursuance of any law.
(2) Any provision by Parliament altering the number of
electoral divisions shall come into effect when the alteration of the
boundaries of the electoral divisions that, in accordance with the
provisions of sub-article (1) of this article, is consequential thereon
comes into effect.
(3) Whenever an alteration of boundaries is made by the
Commission under this article the following provisions shall have
effect:
(a) the Chief Electoral Commissioner shall, as soon as
practicable after it is made, communicate the alteration
to the Prime Minister and to the Leader of the
Opposition;
(b) not later than two months from the receipt of such
communication, the Prime Minister shall cause the
alteration to be placed before the House of
Representatives for consideration by it;
(c) not later than five months from the receipt of the said
communication by the Prime Minister, the House may,
by resolution, either approve the alteration or refer it
back to the Commission for reconsideration;
(d) upon the expiration of six months from the date on
which the alteration was communicated to the Prime
Minister, or, if the alteration is approved by the House,
upon such approval, or, if the alteration is referred
back to the Commission, upon the expiration of two
months from such reference, the Chief Electoral
Commissioner shall cause the alteration to be
published in the Gazette either in its original form or,
if it has been modified by the Commission, as so
modified; and

Electoral divisions.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.25;
XXI.2007.2.

42

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(e) any such alteration shall come into effect upon the
next dissolution of Parliament after the alteration is
published in the Gazette under paragraph (d) of this
sub-article:
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed as preventing the publication of any
electoral register or any other requirments connected
with the registration of voters from being carried out
in accordance with the alteration, under any law for
the time being in force in Malta, before that
dissolution.
(4) An alteration of the boundaries of any electoral division
under this article shall be made in such manner as secures that, at
the time when the Commission carries out its review, the number
obtained by dividing the total electorate in the division (as
ascertained by reference to the electoral register in force at that
time) by the number of members to be returned to the House of
Representatives from that division is as nearly equal to the electoral
quota as is reasonably practicable:
Provided that any such alteration may be made in such
manner that the number of voters in that division is, at the time
when the Commission carries out its review, greater or less than the
electoral quota multiplied by the number of members to be so
returned, but in no case by more than five per centum, in order to
take account of geographical vicinity, differences in density of
population and other relevant factors:
Provided further that the Island of Gozo and the islands of
the Maltese Archipelago other than the Island of Malta shall
together be treated as one electoral division and may not be divided
between two or more electoral divisions.
(4A) The boundaries of electoral divisions for the purpose of any
general elections to be held after the dissolution of Parliament after
the 1st of September 2007 shall be those boundaries as existing on
that date with such adjustments made in accordance with the
provisions of the proviso to sub-article (4B) of this article as may
be necessary in order that the electoral divisions for those elections
shall comply with the provisions of the second proviso of subarticle (4) of this article and of article 61A of this Constitution.
(4B) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-article (1) of this
article, the Electoral Commission shall not review the boundaries
of the electoral divisions as existing on the 1st of September 2007
except until after the general elections to be held immediately after
the dissolution of Parliament immediately after that date which
review shall take place at such intervals from the date of the
publication of the official result of those elections as provided in
sub-article (1) of this article or as otherwise required by the
provisions of the same sub-article:
Provided that the Electoral Commission shall by the 30th
September 2007 review the boundaries of the electoral divisions to
the extent necessary, and only to such extent, to make such
adjustments to the said boundaries in order that the electoral

43

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
divisions for the purpose of those elections shall comply with the
provisions of sub-article (4) of this article; and these adjustments
shall, notwithstanding any other provision of this article, come into
force upon the publication of the register as correct on the 30th
September, 2007.
(5) For the purposes of any review carried out under this
article, "electoral quota" means the number obtained by dividing
the total electorate of Malta (as ascertained from the electoral
register in force at the time when the Commission carries out that
review) by the total number of members to be returned to the House
of Representatives at the general election following the next
dissolution of Parliament.
(6) The conduct of elections in every electoral division and of
any vote taken under the provisions of article 66(3) of this
Constitution shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the
Electoral Commission.
61A. (1) The following provisions of this article shall apply if,
when reviewing the boundaries of the electoral divisions in
accordance with the provisions of article 61 of this Constitution,
the Electoral Commission would, but for the provisions of the
second proviso of sub-article (4) of the same article, have had to
divide the Island of Gozo and the islands of the Maltese
Archipelago other than the Island of Malta, or any part thereof,
between two or more electoral divisions.
(2)

Gozo and the
islands of the Maltese Archipelago
other than the
Island of Malta not
to be divided.
Added by:
XXI.2007.3.
Amended by:
XX.2021.4.

The Electoral Commission shall:
(a) establish the Island of Gozo together with the islands
of the Maltese Archipelago other than the Island of
Malta as one electoral division; and
(b) apply the provisions of sub-articles (4) and (5) of
article 61 of this Constitution only with reference to
the voters and divisions on the Island of Malta without
including in its calculations the division consisting of
Gozo and the other islands of the Maltese Archipelago
or the voters therein:

Provided that this paragraph shall not apply for the purpose
of t he f ir st p ro vi so o f sub - ar ti cle ( 2) of a rt ic le 52 A of th e
Constitution.
(3) For the purposes of paragraph (b) of subarticle (2) of this
article, when calculating the number of voters in each electoral
division on the Island of Malta the total number of electoral
divisions shall be the number of electoral divisions established by
article 17 of the General Elections Act minus one.
62. Whenever the seat of any member of the House of
Representatives becomes vacant the vacancy shall be filled in the
manner provided by or under any law for the time being in force in
Malta.

Cap. 354.
Filling of
vacancies.

44
Determination of
questions as to
membership.
Amended by:
XLVII.1972.2;
XXIV.2015.47.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
63.

Any question whether (a) any person has been validly elected as a member of the
House of Representatives;
(b) any member of the House has vacated his seat therein
or is required, under the provisions of sub-article (2)
of article 55 of this Constitution, to cease to perform
his functions as a member;
(c) any person has been validly elected as Speaker from
among persons who are not members of the House or,
having been so elected, has vacated the office of
Speaker; or
(d) the seat of a Member of Parliament has become vacant
in terms of paragraph (ff) of sub-article (1) of article
55,

shall be referred to and determined by the Constitutional Court in
accordance with the provisions of any law for the time being in
force in Malta.
Clerk to House of
Representatives
and his staff.
Amended by:
XLII. 2016.20.

64. (1) There shall be a Clerk to the House of Representatives.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-article (6) of
article 110 of this Constitution and to any other law applicable to
employment in the public sector, and without prejudice to the
provisions of sub-article (1) of this article, the Speaker may appoint
such officials and employees as may be required for the fulfilment
of functions, powers and duties under the Parliamentary Service
Act. The said power of appointment includes the power to approve
the number of persons who may be appointed under this article both
with reference to the total number and with reference to specific
duties, salaries and conditions of employment:
Provided that once the number of posts in the Parliamentary
Service has been approved by the Minister for Finance and funds
are made available, no further administrative approvals shall be
required for the Parliamentary Service to conclude contracts of
employment in accordance with those approvals.

Office of
Ombudsman.
Added by:
XIV.2007.2.
Amended by:
XLII.2020.3.

64A. (1) There shall be a Commissioner for Administrative
Investigations to be called the Ombudsman who shall have the
function to investigate actions taken by or on behalf of the
Government, or by such other authority, body or person as may be
provided by law (including an authority, body or office established
by this Constitution), being actions taken in the exercise of their
administrative functions.
(2) The Ombudsman shall be appointed by the President acting in
accordance with a resolution of the House supported by the votes of not
less than two-thirds of all the members of the House:
Provided that notwithstanding the provisions of any other law,
if the Resolution is not supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds
of all the members of the House, the person occupying the office of the
Ombudsman shall, in any circumstance, remain in office until the

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
Resolution is supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the
members of the House:
Provided further that when a person who is not a member of the
House is elected to be Speaker of the House, he shall not be treated as a
member of the House for the purpose of establishing the majority
required by this article.
(3) The Ombudsman may at any time be removed or suspended
from his office by the President, upon an address from the House
supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all members of
the House, requesting such removal on the ground of proved
inability to perform the functions of his office (whether arising
from infirmity of body or mind or any other cause) or proved
misbehaviour, and the provisions of the proviso to sub-article (2)
shall also apply for the purpose of establishing the majority
required under this sub-article:
Provided that at any time when Parliament is not in
session, an Ombudsman may be suspended from his office by the
President acting in accordance with his own discretion for inability
to perform the functions of his office or misbehaviour proved to the
satisfaction of the President; but any such suspension shall not
continue in force beyond two months after the beginning of the
next ensuing session of Parliament.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this sub-article and without
prejudice to sub-article (1), the Ombudsman may conduct any such
investigation on his initiative or on the written complaint of any
person having an interest who claims to have been aggrieved by
any action as aforesaid, or where the person aggrieved has died or
is for any reason unable to act for himself, of his heir or
representative:
Provided that any Committee of the House may at any time
refer to the Ombudsman any petition that is before that Committee
for consideration, or any matter to which the petition relates. In any
such case the Ombudsman shall, subject to any special directions of
the Committee, investigate the matters so referred, so far as they
are within his jurisdiction and make such report to the Committee if
he thinks fit:
Provided further that the Prime Minister may at any time
refer to the Ombudsman for investigation and report any matter,
other than a matter which is subject to judicial proceeding, which
the Prime Minister considers should be investigated by the
Ombudsman. Where, pursuant to this proviso, a matter is
investigated by the Ombudsman, he shall report thereon to the
Prime Minister, and may thereafter make such report to Parliament
on the matter as he thinks fit:
Provided further that in the exercise of his functions, the
Ombudsman shall not be subject to the direction or control of any
other person or authority:

45

46

Cap. 326.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
Provided further that if during or after any investigation
the Ombudsman is of the opinion that there is evidence of any
corrupt practice as defined in the Permanent Commission Against
Corruption Act, the Ombudsman may refer his findings directly to
the Attorney General.
(5) Any matter ancillary or incidental thereto or considered
necessary or expedient for the carrying out of the function referred to
in sub-article (1) shall be provided for by an Act of Parliament.
PART 2

Powers and Procedure of Parliament
Power to make
laws.
Amended by:
V.2003.7.

65. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
Parliament may make laws for the peace, order and good
government of Malta in conformity with full respect for human
rights, generally accepted principles of international law and
Malta’s international and regional obligations in particular those
assumed by the treaty of accession to the European Union signed in
Athens on the 16th April, 2003.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-article (1) and
subject to the provisions of sub-articles (3), (4) and (5) of this
article, Parliament may by law determine the privileges,
immunities and powers of the House of Representatives and the
members thereof.
(3) No civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted against
any member of the House of Representatives for words spoken
before, or written in a report to, the House or a committee thereof
or by reason of any matter or thing brought by him therein by
petition, bill, resolution, motion or otherwise.
(4) For the duration of any session members of the House of
Representatives shall enjoy freedom from arrest for any civil debt
except a debt the contraction of which constitutes a criminal
offence.
(5) No process issued by any court in the exercise of its civil
jurisdiction shall be served or executed within the precincts of the
House of Representatives while the House is sitting or through the
Speaker, the Clerk or any officer of the House.

Alteration of this
Constitution.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.26.
Amended by:
IV.1987.5;
XIII.2001.3;
XIV.2007.3:
XLIV.2016 .2.
XX.2021.5.

66. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, Parliament
may alter any of the provisions of this Constitution and (in so far as
it forms part of the law of Malta) any of the provisions of the Malta
Independence Act, 1964.
(2)

In so far as it alters (a) this article; or
(b) article 1, sub-article (2) of article 2, sub-article (1) of
article 3, sub-article (1) of article 5, article 6, articles
32 to 48 (inclusive), articles 51, 52, 52A, 56, 57, 60, 61
and 64A, sub-article (3) of article 65, sub-article (2) of
article 75, article 76 (other than sub-article (2)
thereof), articles 77 and 78, article 80, article 91,

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
articles 95, 96, 96A, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101A, 101B,
articles 102 to 110 (inclusive), articles 113, 114, 115A,
118, 119 or 120 of this Constitution; or
(c) article 124 of this Constitution in its application to any
of the provisions specified in paragraph (a) or (b) of
this sub-article,
a bill for an Act of Parliament under this article shall not be passed
in the House of Representatives unless at the final voting thereon in
that House it is supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of
all the members of the House.
(3)

In so far as it alters (a) this sub-article or sub-article (4) of this article; or
(b) sub-article (2) of article 76 of this Constitution,

a bill for an Act of Parliament under this article shall not be
presented to the President for his assent unless not less than three
nor more than six months after its passage through the House in the
manner specified in sub-article (2) of this article it has been
submitted to the electors qualified to vote for the election of
members of the House of Representatives and the majority of the
electors voting have approved the bill.
(4) The provisions of sub-article (10) of article 56 of this
Constitution shall apply to the voting on a bill submitted to the
electors under sub-article (3) of this article as they apply to voting
at the election of members of the House of Representatives, and
subject as aforesaid the vote on such bill shall be taken in such
manner as Parliament may prescribe.
(5) In so far as it alters any of the provisions of this
Constitution other than those specified in sub-articles (2) and (3) of
this article, a bill for an Act of Parliament under this article shall
not be passed in the House of Representatives unless at the final
voting thereon in that House it is supported by the votes of a
majority of all the members of the House.
(6) An Act of Parliament altering the number of members of
the House of Representatives shall not affect the membership of the
House before the dissolution of Parliament next following its
enactment.
(7)

In this article (a) references to any of the provisions of this Constitution
or of the Malta Independence Act, 1964 include
references to any law that amends or replaces that
provision; and
(b) references to the alteration of any of the provisions of
this Constitution or of the Malta Independence Act,
1964 include references to the amendment,
modification or re-enactment, with or without
amendment or modification, of that provision, the
suspension or repeal of that provision and the making
of a different provision in lieu of that provision.

47

48
Regulation of
procedure in House
of Representatives.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
67. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
House of Representatives may regulate its own procedure.
(2) The House of Representatives may act notwithstanding any
vacancy in its membership (including any vacancy not filled when
the House first meets on or after the appointed day or after any
dissolution of Parliament) and the presence or participation of any
person not entitled to be present at o r to participate i n the
proceedings of the House shall not invalidate those proceedings.
(3) Any provision made in pursuance of sub-article (1) of this
article for setting up Committees of the House to enquire into
matters of general public importance shall be designed to secure
that, so far as it appears practicable to the House, any such
Committee is so composed as fairly to represent the House.

Oath to be taken by
members of House
of Representatives.

68. No member of the House of Representatives shall be
permitted to take part in the proceedings of the House (other than
proceedings necessary for the purposes of this article) until he has
taken and subscribed before the House the oath of allegiance:
Provided that the election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker
may take place before the members of the House have taken and
subscribed such oath.

Presiding in House
of Representatives.

69. (1) There shall preside at any sitting of the House of
Representatives (a) the Speaker; or
(b) in the absence of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; or
(c) in the absence of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker,
such member of the House (not being a Minister or a
Parliamentary Secretary) as the House may elect for
that purpose.
(2) References in this article to circumstances in which the
Speaker or the Deputy Speaker is absent include references to
circumstances in which the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker is
vacant.

Quorum in House
of Representatives.

70. (1) If at any sitting of the House of Representatives any
member who is present draws the attention of the person presiding
at the sitting to the absence of a quorum and, after such interval as
may be prescribed in the Standing Orders of the House, the person
presiding at the sitting ascertains that a quorum of the House is still
not present, the House shall be adjourned.
(2)

For the purposes of this article (a) a quorum of the House of Representatives shall consist
of fifteen members; and
(b) the person presiding at the sitting of the House shall
not be included in reckoning whether there is a quorum
present.

Voting.

71. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all
questions proposed for decision in the House of Representatives

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

49

shall be determined by a majority of the votes of the members
thereof present and voting.
(2) The Speaker shall not vote unless on any question the votes
are equally divided, in which case he shall have and exercise a
casting vote.
(3) Any other person shall, when presiding in the House of
Representatives, retain his original vote as a member and, if upon
any question, the votes are equally divided, shall also have and
exercise a casting vote.
72. (1) The power of Parliament to make laws shall be
exercised by bills passed by the House of Representatives and
assented to by the President.

Mode of exercising
legislative powers.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.27.

(2) When a bill is presented to the President for assent, he shall
without delay signify that he assents.
(3) A bill shall not become law unless it has been duly passed
and assented to in accordance with this Constitution.
(4) When a law has been assented to by the President it shall
without delay be published in the Gazette and shall not come into
operation until it has been so published, but Parliament may
postpone the coming into operation of any such law and may make
laws with retrospective effect.
73. Except upon the recommendations of the President
signified by a Minister, the House of Representatives shall not (a) proceed upon any bill (including any amendment to a
bill) that, in the opinion of the person presiding, makes
provision for any of the following purposes, that is to
say, for imposing or increasing any tax, for imposing
or increasing any charge on the revenues or other
funds of Malta or for altering any such charge
otherwise than by reducing it, or for compounding or
remitting any debt due to Malta;

Restriction with
regard to certain
financial measures.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.28.

(b) proceed upon any motion (including any amendment
to a motion) the effect of which, in the opinion of the
person presiding, would be to make provision for any
of the purposes aforesaid; or
(c) receive any petition which, in the opinion of the
person presiding, requests that provision be made for
any of the purposes aforesaid.
74. Save as otherwise provided by Parliament, every law shall
be enacted in both the Maltese and English languages and, if there
is any conflict between the Maltese and the English texts of any
law, the Maltese text shall prevail.

Language of Laws.

50

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
PART 3

Summoning, prorogation and dissolution
Sessions of
Parliament.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.29.

75. (1) Each session of Parliament shall commence at such
time as the President may by proclamation appoint and shall be
held at such place or places as the President by proclamation, or as
the House of Representatives in any manner it may deem
appropriate, may from time to time appoint.
(2) There shall be a session of Parliament once at least in every
year, so that a period of twelve months shall not intervene between
the last sitting of Parliament in one session and the first sitting
thereof in the next session.
(3) The House of Representatives shall meet not later than two
months after the publication of the official result of any general
election by the Electoral Commission on a day appointed by the
President.

Prorogation and
dissolution of
Parliament.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.30.

76. (1) The President may at any time by proclamation
prorogue or dissolve Parliament.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-article (3) of this article,
Parliament, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years
from the date of its first sitting after any dissolution and shall then
stand dissolved.
(3) At any time when Malta is at war, Parliament may from
time to time extend the period of five years specified in sub-article
(2) of this article for not more than twelve months at a time:
Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended
under this sub-article for more than five years.
(4) If between a dissolution of Parliament and the next ensuing
general election of members of the House of Representatives an
emergency arises of such a nature that, in the opinion of the Prime
Minister it is necessary to recall Parliament, the President may by
proclamation summon the Parliament that has been dissolved to
meet, and that Parliament shall thereupon be deemed (except for
the purpose of article 77 and, in relation to the next ensuing general
election, article 61(3) and 66(6) of this Constitution) not to have
been dissolved but shall be deemed (except as aforesaid) to be
dissolved on the date on which the polls are concluded in the next
ensuing general election.
(5) In the exercise of his powers under this article the President
shall act in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister:
Provided that (a) if the House of Representatives passes a resolution,
supported by the votes of a majority of all the
members thereof, that it has no confidence in the
Government, and the Prime Minister does not within
three days either resign from his office or advise a
dissolution, the President may dissolve Parliament;
(b) if the office of Prime Minister is vacant and the

51

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
President considers that there is no prospect of his
being able within a reasonable time to appoint to that
office a person who can command the support of a
majority of the members of the House of
Representatives, the President may dissolve
Parliament; and
(c) if the Prime Minister recommends a dissolution and
the President considers that the Government of Malta
can be carried on without a dissolution and that a
dissolution would not be in the interests of Malta, the
President may refuse to dissolve Parliament.
77. A general election of members of the House of
Representatives shall be held at such time within three months after
every dissolution of Parliament as the President acting in
accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, shall by
proclamation appoint.

General elections.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.31.

CHAPTER VII

The Executive
78. (1) The executive authority of Malta is vested in the
President.
(2) The executive authority of Malta shall be exercised by the
President, either directly or through officers subordinate to him, in
accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

Executive
authority of Malta.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.32.
Amended by:
XLIV.2020.3.

(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from
conferring functions on the President or on persons or authorities
other than the President.
79. (1) There shall be a Cabinet for Malta which shall consist
of the Prime Minister and such number of other Ministers as may
be appointed in accordance with article 80 of this Constitution.

The Cabinet.

(2) The Cabinet shall have the general direction and control of
the Government of Malta and shall be collectively responsible
therefor to Parliament.
80. Wherever there shall be occasion for the appointment of a
Prime Minister, the President shall appoint as Prime Minister the
member of the House of Representatives who, in his judgment, is
best able to command the support of a majority of the members of
that House and shall, acting in accordance with the advice of the
Prime Minister, appoint the other Ministers from among the
members of the House of Representatives:
Provided that if occasion arises for making an appointment to the
office of Prime Minister or any other Minister while Parliament is
dissolved, a person who was a member of the House of
Representatives immediately before the dissolution may be
appointed as Prime Minister or any other Minister as if, in each
case, such person were still a member of the House of
Representatives, but any person so appointed shall vacate office at

Appointment of
Ministers.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.33.

52

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
the beginning of the next session of Parliament if he is not then a
member thereof.

Tenure of office of
Ministers.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.34.

81. (1) If the House of Representatives passes a resolution,
supported by the votes of a majority of all the members thereof,
that it has no confidence in the Government, the President may
remove the Prime Minister from office:
Provided that the President shall not do so unless three days have
elapsed and he has decided not to dissolve Parliament under article
76 of this Constitution.
(2)

The office of Prime Minister shall also become vacant (a) when, after any dissolution of Parliament, the Prime
Minister is informed by the President that the
President is about to re-appoint him as Prime Minister
or to appoint another person as Prime Minister;
(b) if he ceases to be a member of the House of
Representatives otherwise than by a dissolution of
Parliament; or
(c) if, under the provisions of sub-article (2) of article 55
of this Constitution, he is required to cease to perform
his functions as a member of the House of
Representatives.

(3) The office of a Minister, other than the office of Prime
Minister shall become vacant (a) upon the appointment or re-appointment of any person
to the office of Prime Minister;
(b) if his appointment to his office is revoked by the
President, acting in accordance with the advice of the
Prime Minister;
(c) if he ceases to be a member of the House of
Representatives otherwise than by a dissolution of
Parliament; or
(d) if, under the provisions of sub-article (2) of article 55
of this Constitution, he is required to cease to perform
his functions as a member of the House of
Representatives.
Allocation of
portfolios to
Ministers.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.35.

82. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime
Minister, may, by directions in writing, assign to the Prime
Minister or any other Minister responsibility for any business of the
Government of Malta including the administration of any
department of government.
(2) Nothing in this article shall empower the President to
confer on any Minister authority to exercise any power or to
discharge any duty that is conferred or imposed by this Constitution
or any other law on any person or authority other than that Minister.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
83. (1) Whenever the Prime Minister is absent from Malta or
on vacation, or is unable by reason of illness to perform the
functions of his office, the President may authorise any other
member of the Cabinet to perform those functions (other than the
functions conferred by this article) and that member may perform
those functions until his authority is revoked by the President.

53
Acting Prime
Minister.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.36.

(2) The powers of the President under this article shall be
exercised by him in accordance with the advice of the Prime
Minister:
Provided that if the President considers that it is impracticable to
obtain the advice of the Prime Minister owing to his absence or
illness he may exercise those powers without that advice.
84. (1) Whenever a Minister other than the Prime Minister is
unable, by reason of his illness or absence from Malta, to perform
the functions of his office, the President may appoint another
member of the House of Representatives to be a temporary
Minister:

Temporary
Ministers.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.37.

Provided that if occasion arises for making an appointment while
Parliament is dissolved, a person who, immediately before the
dissolution, was a member of the House of Representatives may be
appointed as a temporary Minister as if he were still a member of
that House, but any person so appointed shall vacate office at the
beginning of the next session of Parliament if he is not then a
member thereof.
(2) Subject to the provisions of article 81 of this Constitution, a
temporary Minister shall hold office until he is notified by the
President that the Minister on account of whose inability to perform
the functions of his office he was appointed is again able to
perform those functions or until that Minister vacates his office.
(3) The powers of the President under this article shall be
exercised by him in accordance with the advice of the Prime
Minister.
85. (1) In the exercise of his functions the President shall act
in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or a Minister acting
under the general authority of the Cabinet except in cases where he
is required by this Constitution or any other law to act in
accordance with the advice of any person or authority other than
the Cabinet:
Provided that the President shall act in accordance with his own
deliberate judgment in the performance of the following functions(a) in the exercise of the powers relating to the dissolution
of Parliament conferred upon him by the proviso to
sub-article (5) of article 76 of this Constitution;
(b) in the exercise of the power to appoint the Prime
Minister or remove the Prime Minister from office
conferred upon him by article 80 and sub-article (1) of
article 81 of this Constitution;
(c) in the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by

Exercise of
functions of
President.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.38.
Amended by:
XLIV.2020.4.

54

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
article 83 of this Constitution (which relates to the
performance of the functions of the Prime Minister
during absence, vacation or illness) in the
circumstances described in the proviso to sub-article
(2)of that article;
(d) in the exercise of the power to appoint the Leader of
the Opposition and to revoke any such appointment
conferred upon him by article 90 of this Constitution;
and
(e) in signifying his approval for the purposes of subarticle (4) of article 110 of this Constitution of an
appointment to an office on his personal staff;
(f)

in the exercise of the power conferred by this
Constitution to make appointment to any office under this
Constitution.

(2) Where by this Constitution the President is required to act
in accordance with the advice of any person or authority, the
question whether he has in any case received, or acted in
accordance with, such advice shall not be enquired into in any
court.
(3) The reference in sub-article (1) of this article to the
functions of the President shall be construed as a reference to his
powers and duties in the exercise of the executive authority of
Malta and to any other powers and duties conferred or imposed on
him as President by or under this Constitution or any other law.
Exercise of Prime
Minister’s
functions.
Amended by:
XII.2021.3.

86. (1) Where by this Constitution the Prime Minister is
required to exercise any function on the recommendation of any
person or authority he shall exercise that function in accordance
with such recommendation:
Provided that (a) before he acts in accordance therewith he may once
refer that recommendation back for reconsideration by
the person or authority concerned; and
(b) if that person or authority, having reconsidered the
original recommendation under the preceding
paragraph,
substitutes
therefor
a
different
recommendation, the provisions of this sub-article
shall apply to that different recommendation as they
apply to the original recommendation.
(2) Where by this Constitution the Prime Minister is required
to perform any function after consultation with any person or
authority, he shall not be obliged to perform that function in
accordance with the advice of that person or authority.
(3) Where by this Constitution the Prime Minister is required
to perform any function in accordance with the recommendation of,
or after consultation with, any person or authority, the question
whether he has in any case received, or acted in accordance with
such recommendation or whether he has consulted with such person
or authority shall not be enquired into in any court.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

55

(4) Where by this Constitution the Prime Minister is required to
perform the functions listed in articles 120(2), (6) and (7), he shall do so
after acting on such advice as might have been given in that respect by
the Cabinet of Ministers.
87. The Prime Minister shall keep the President fully informed
concerning the general conduct of the Government of Malta and
shall furnish the President with such information as he may request
with respect to any particular matter relating to the Government of
Malta.

The President to be
informed
concerning matters
of government.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.39.

88. (1) The President, acting in accordance with the advice of
the Prime Minister, may appoint Parliamentary Secretaries from
among the members of the House of Representatives to assist
Ministers in the performance of their duties:

Parliamentary
Secretaries.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.40.

Provided that if occasion arises for making an appointment while
Parliament is dissolved, a person who immediately before the
dissolution was a member of the House of Representatives may be
appointed as a Parliamentary Secretary as if he were still a member
of that House, but any person so appointed shall vacate office at the
beginning of the next session of Parliament if he is not then a
member thereof.
(2) The provisions of sub-article (3) of article 81 of this
Constitution shall apply to Parliamentary Secretaries as they apply
to Ministers.
89. A Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary shall not enter
upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the
oath of allegiance and the oath of office set out in the Third and in
the Second Schedule to this Constitution.

Oath to be taken by
Ministers.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.41.

90. (1) There shall be a Leader of the Opposition who shall be
appointed by the President.

Leader of the
Opposition.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.42.

(2) Whenever there shall be occasion for the appointment of a
Leader of the Opposition, the President shall appoint (a) if there is one opposition party whose numerical
strength in the House of Representatives is greater
than the strength of any other opposition party, the
member of the House of Representatives who is the
Leader of that party; or
(b) if, by reason of an equality in the numerical strength of
the opposition parties in the House or by reason that
there is no opposition party, no person is qualified for
appointment under paragraph (a) of this sub-article,
the member of the House who, in the judgment of the
President, commands the support of the largest single
group of members of the House in opposition to the
Government who are prepared to support one leader.
(3) The office of Leader of the Opposition shall become
vacant (a) if after any dissolution of Parliament, he is informed
by the President that the President is about to appoint

56

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
another person as Leader of the Opposition;
(b) if he ceases to be a member of the House of
Representatives otherwise than by a dissolution of
Parliament;
(c) if, under the provisions of sub-article (2) of article 55
of this Constitution, he is required to cease to perform
his functions as a member of the House of
Representatives; or
(d) if his appointment is revoked under the provisions of
sub-article (4) of this article.
(4) If, in the judgment of the President, a member of the House
of Representatives other than the Leader of the Opposition, has
become the Leader in the House of the opposition party having the
greatest numerical strength in the House or, as the case may be, the
Leader of the Opposition has ceased to command the support of the
largest single group of members in opposition to the Government,
the President shall revoke the appointment of the Leader of the
Opposition.
(5) Sub-article (4) of this article shall not have effect while
Parliament is dissolved.

Attorney General.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.43;
XIV.2007.4;
XLV.2020.3;
XLI.2020.3.

91. (1) There shall be an Attorney General whose office shall
be a public office and who shall be appointed by the President
acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister.
(2) A person shall not be qualified to hold office as Attorney
General unless he is qualified for appointment as a judge of the
Superior Courts.
(3)
In the exercise of his powers to institute, undertake and
d i s c o n t i n u e c r i m i n a l p r o c e e d i n g s an d o f a n y o t h e r p o w e r s
conferred on him by any law in terms which authorise him to
exercise that power in his individual judgment the Attorney General
shall have Constitutional independence and shall not be subject to the
direction or control of any other person or authority except insofar as a
law may provide:
(a) for the judicial review of a decision not to prosecute or
of any other decision taken by the Attorney General,
on the grounds of illegality or unreasonableness; or
(b) for the judicial review on the basis of criteria
established by law of a decision of the Attorney
General that a prosecution should take place in a
superior court of criminal jurisdiction where the
punishment applicable would be higher than that
which would apply had the same offence been tried
before an inferior court of criminal jurisdiction.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-article (5) of this article,
the Attorney General shall vacate his office when he attains the age
of sixty-five years.
(5)

The Attorney General shall not be removed from his office

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

57

except by the President upon an address by the House supported by
the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members thereof and
requesting such removal on the grounds of proved inability to
perform the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity
of body or mind or any other cause) or proved misbehaviour.
(6) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the
presentation of an address and for the investigation and proof of the
inability or misbehaviour under the provisions of the last preceding
sub-article.
91A. (1)
There shall be a State Advocate whose office shall be
a public office and who shall be appointed by the President acting in
accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister.

State Advocate.
Added by:
XXV.2019.10;
Amended by:
XLV.2020.4.

(2)
A person shall not be qualified to hold office as State
Advocate unless he is qualified for appointment as a judge of the
Superior Courts.
(3)
The State Advocate shall be the advisor to Government in
matters of law and legal opinion. He shall act in the public interest and
shall safeguard the legality of State action. The State Advocate shall
also perform such other duties and functions as may be conferred upon
him by this Constitution or by any law. In the exercise of his functions,
the State Advocate shall act in his individual judgment and he shall not
be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority.
(4)
Subject to the provisions of sub-article (5), the State
Advocate shall vacate his office when he attains the age of sixty-five
(65) years.
(5)
The State Advocate shall not be removed from office except
by the President upon an address by the House supported by the votes
of not less than two-thirds of all the members thereof and requesting
such removal on the ground of proved inability to perform the
functions of office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind or
any other cause) or proved misbehaviour.
(6) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the
presentation of an address and for the investigation and proof of the
inability or misbehaviour under the provisions of the last preceding
sub-article.
92. (1) Where any Minister has been charged with
responsibility for any department of government, he shall exercise
general direction and control over that department; and, subject to
such direction and control, the department may be under the
supervision of a Permanent Secretary:
Provided that two or more departments of government may be
placed under the supervision of one Permanent Secretary.
(2) The Prime Minister shall be responsible for assigning
departments of government to Permanent Secretaries.

Permanent
Secretaries and
heads of
government
departments.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.44;
III.2019.40;
XIX.2020.3;
XXVI.2021.2.

58

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(3) Power to appoint public officers to hold or act in the office of
Permanent Secretary and to remove from office persons holding or
acting in such office shall vest in the President of Malta acting in
accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission:
Provided that the Public Service Commission shall give its
advice to the President after having received and evaluated the
recommendation given by the Principal Permanent Secretary.
(4) Heads of departments of government other than those
whose manner of appointment is specifically provided for in this
Constitution shall be appointed from amongst senior public officers
by the Prime Minister acting after consultation with the Public
Service Commission:

Cap. 164.

Provided that notwithstanding the provisions of this subarticle the appointment of the Commissioner of Police shall be made
by the Prime Minister after consultation with the Public Service
Commission as may be provided in the Police Act.
(5) The Principal Permanent Secretary shall be appointed in the
same manner as a Permanent Secretary from amongst persons
having the qualifications to be so appointed in terms of sub-articles
(1), (2) and (3):
Provided that the power to appoint the Principal Permanent
Secretary shall vest in the President acting in accordance with the
advice of the Cabinet of Ministers and after consulting the Public
Service Commission:
Provided further that the functions of the Principal Permanent
Secretary together with any other matter ancillary or incidental or
considered necessary or expedient for the carrying out of the functions
of the Principal Permanent Secretary shall be provided for by an Act of
Parliament.

Prerogative of
mercy.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.45.

93. (1)

The President shall have power to -

(a) grant to any person concerned in or convicted of any
offence a pardon, either free or subject to lawful
conditions;
(b) grant to any person a respite, either indefinite or for a
specified period, of the execution of any sentence
passed on that person for any offence;
(c) substitute a less severe form of punishment for any
punishment imposed on any person for any offence; or
(d) remit the whole or part of any sentence passed on any
person for an offence or for any penalty or forfeiture
otherwise due to the State on account of any offence.
(2) (a) Where any person has been sentenced to death by any
court in Malta, the President shall cause a written report of the case
from the trial judge, or, in the case of a court-martial the person
presiding, and such other information derived from the record of
the case or elsewhere as the President may require, to be sent to the

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

59

Minister responsible for justice.
(b) The said Minister shall send such written report and
information (if any) to the Cabinet, and the Cabinet shall advise the
President whether he should grant the offender a pardon or respite
in the exercise of the powers conferred on him by this article.
94. (1)The Principal Permanent Secretary shall be the most
senior public officer and shall act as Secretary to the Cabinet:
Provided that the Prime Minister may appoint a different
person to act as Secretary to the Cabinet, and in such case the
Secretary to the Cabinet shall be appointed in the same manner as a
Permanent Secretary from amongst persons having the
qualifications to be so appointed in terms of article 92.

Secretary to the
Cabinet.
Substituted by:
III.2019.41.

(2) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall be responsible, in
accordance with such instructions as may be given to him by the Prime
Minister, for arranging the business for, and keeping the minutes of,
the meetings of the Cabinet and for conveying the decisions of the
Cabinet to the appropriate person or authority, and shall have such
other functions as the Prime Minister may from time to time direct.
CHAPTER VIII

The Judiciary
95. (1) There shall be in and for Malta such Superior Courts
having such powers and jurisdiction as may be provided by any law
for the time being in force in Malta.
(2) One of the Superior Courts, composed of such three judges
as could, in accordance with any law for the time being in force in
Malta, compose the Court of Appeal, shall be known as the
Constitutional Court and shall have jurisdiction to hear and
determine (a) such questions as are referred to in article 63 of the
Constitution;
(b) any reference made to it in accordance with article 56
of this Constitution and any matter referred to it in
accordance with any law relating to the election of
members of the House of Representatives;
(c) appeals from decisions of the Civil Court, First Hall,
under article 46 of this Constitution;
(d) appeals from decisions of any court of original
jurisdiction in Malta as to the interpretation of this
Constitution other than those which may fall under
article 46 of this Constitution;
(e) appeals from decisions of any court of original
jurisdiction in Malta on questions as to the validity of
laws other than those which may fall under article 46
of this Constitution; and
(f)

any question decided by a court of original jurisdiction

Superior Courts.
Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.46.

60

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
in Malta together with any of the questions referred to
in the foregoing paragraphs of this sub-article on
which an appeal has been made to the Constitutional
Court:
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall preclude
an appeal being brought separately before the Court of
Appeal in accordance with any law for the time being
in force in Malta.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-article (2) of this
article, if any such question as is referred to in paragraph (d) or (e)
of that sub-article arises for the first time in proceedings in a court
of appellate jurisdiction, that court shall refer the question to the
court which gave the original decision, unless in its opinion the
raising of the question is merely frivolous or vexatious, and that
court shall give its decision on any such question and, subject to
any appeal in accordance with the provisions of sub-article (2) of
this article, the court in which the question arose shall dispose of
the question in accordance with that decision.
(4) The provisions of sub-articles (6) and (7) of article 46 of
this Constitution shall apply to the Constitutional Court and for that
purpose references to that article in the said sub-articles shall be
construed as references to this article.
(5) If at any time during an election of members of the House
of Representatives and the period of thirty days following any such
election, the Constitutional Court is not constituted as provided in
this article, the said Court shall, thereupon and until otherwise
constituted according to law, be constituted by virtue of this subarticle and shall be composed of the three more senior of the judges
then in office, including, if any is in office, the Chief Justice or
other judge performing the functions of Chief Justice; and if at any
other time the said Court is not constituted as provided in this
article for a period exceeding fifteen days, such Court shall, upon
the expiration of the said period of fifteen days and until otherwise
constituted according to law, be constituted by virtue of this subarticle and shall be composed of the three more senior judges as
aforesaid.
(6) The judges of the Superior Courts shall be a Chief Justice
and such number of other judges as may be prescribed by any law
for the time being in force in Malta:
Provided that the office of a judge of the Superior Courts shall
not, without his consent, be abolished during his continuance in
office.

Appointment of
judges.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.47;
XLIV.2016 .3;
XLIII.2020.2.

96. (1) The judges of the superior courts shall be appointed by
the President acting in accordance with the recommendation made by
the Judicial Appointments Committee established by article 96A of the
Constitution.
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed a judge of
the Superior Courts unless for a period of, or periods amounting in
the aggregate to, not less than twelve years he has either practised
as an advocate in Malta or served as a magistrate in Malta, or has

61

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
partly so practised and partly so served.
(3) The Chief Justice shall be appointed by the President acting in
accordance with a resolution of the House supported by the votes of not
less than two-thirds of all the members of the House:
Provided that notwithstanding the provisions of article 97(1), if
the Resolution is not supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds
of all the members of the House, the person occupying the office of
Chief Justice shall, in any circumstance, remain in office until the
Resolution is supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the
members of the House.
96A. (1) There shall be a Judicial Appointments Committee,
hereinafter in this article referred to as "the Committee", which
shall be a subcommittee of the Commission for the Administration
of Justice established by article 101A of this Constitution and
which shall be composed as follows:
(a) the Chief Justice;
(b) two (2) members elected for a period of four (4) years
by the judges of the superior court from among
themselves;
(c) one member elected for a period of four (4) years by
the magistrates of the inferior courts from among
themselves;
(d) the Auditor General;
(e) the Commissioner for Administrative Investigations
(Ombudsman); and
(f)

the President of the Chamber of Advocates:

Provided that the President of the Chamber of Advocates shall
not be eligible to be appointed a member of the judiciary before the
expiration of a period of two (2) years starting from the day on which he
last occupied a post on the Committee or he was last a Committee
member.
(2) The Committee shall be chaired by the Chief Justice or, in
his absence, by the judge who substitutes him in accordance with
paragraph (d) of sub-article (3).
(3)

(a) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed or to
continue to hold office as a member of the Committee if
he is a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary, a Member
of the House of Representatives, a member of a local
government or an official or a candidate of a political
party:
Provided that where the President of the Chamber of
Advocates is not qualified to be appointed or to hold
office as aforesaid the Chamber of Advocates shall
nominate another advocate to sit on the Committee in
his stead.
(b) The office of a member of the Committee shall become
vacant if any circumstances arise that, if the person

Judicial
Appointments
Committee.
Added by:
XLIV. 2016.5.
Amended by:
XLIII.2020.3.

62

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
were not a member of the Committee, the person would
not qualify for membership thereof.
(c) A member of the Committee may abstain or be
challenged in the same circumstances as a judge of the
Superior Courts.
(d) Where a member of the Committee abstains or is
challenged, in the case of the Chief Justice he shall be
substituted by a judge who shall be the next most senior
judge in office, in the case of the Auditor General he shall
be substituted by the next most senior officer according
to office in the National Audit Office, in the case of the
Commissioner for Administrative Investigations he shall
be substituted by the next most senior officer according
to the Office of the Ombudsman and in the case of the
President of the Chamber of Advocates he shall be
replaced by the next most senior advocate according to
office in the committee of the Chamber of Advocates.
(4) In the exercise of their functions the members of the
Committee shall act on their individual judgement and shall not be
subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.
(5) There shall be a Secretary to the Committee who shall be
appointed by the Minister responsible for justice.
(6)

The functions of the Committee shall be:
(a) to receive and examine expressions of interest from
persons interested in being appointed to the office of
judge of the Superior Courts (other than the office of
Chief Justice) or of magistrate of the Inferior Courts,
except from persons to whom paragraph (e) applies;
(b) to keep a permanent register of expressions of interest
mentioned in paragraph (a) and to the acts relative
thereto, which register shall be kept secret and shall be
accessible only to the members of the Committee, and
the President of Malta;
(c) to conduct interviews and evaluations of candidates
for the above-mentioned offices in such manner as it
deems appropriate and for this purpose to request
information from any public authority as it considers
to be reasonably required;
(d) when a vacancy in the office of judge or magistrate
occurs, the Committee shall send to the President,
through the Secretary, the names of three candidates
that the Committee considers to be most suitable along
with a detailed report on the suitability and merit of
these three candidates who, in the opinion of the
Committee, are deemed to be the most suitable for the
appointment of these offices:
Provided that the President shall be entitled to elect a
judge or a magistrate exclusively from the names of the
three candidates transmitted by the Committee which
names of the three candidates shall be made public in the

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

63

President’s decision;
(e) to give advice on appointment to any other judicial
office or office in the courts as the Minister
responsible for justice may from time to time request;
(f)

to approach with a view of eliciting interest amongst
qualified persons for the office of judge or magistrate:

Provided that the evaluation referred to in paragraph (d)
shall be made by not later than sixty days from when the
Committee receives the expression of interest and the advice
mentioned in paragraphs (e) and (f) shall be given by not later than
thirty days from when it was requested, or within such other time
limits as the Minister responsible for justice may, with the
agreement of the Committee, by order in the Gazette establish.
(7) The proceedings of the Committee shall be confidential and
shall be held in camera a n d n o m e m b e r o r s e c r e t a r y o f t h e
Committee may be called to give evidence before any court or other
body with regard to any document received by or any matter
discussed or communicated to or by the Committee.
(8) The Committee shall regulate its own procedure and shall be
obliged to publish without being subject to any direction the policy
amongst others of maintaining gender balance in the appointment of
members of the judiciary, which shall guide the Committee.
96B. (1) Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of judge or
magistrate, the Minister responsible for justice shall issue a public
call for applications open to persons who have the necessary
qualifications and experience required to be appointed to the office
of judge or magistrate.
(2) No person shall be entitled to be appointed to the office of
judge or magistrate unless that person:
(a) has the number of years of practice of the profession of
advocate in Malta as established in articles 96 or 100
of the Constitution as the case may be;
(b) at the time of application be in possession of a valid
warrant to practice as an advocate in Malta and must
not be precluded from appointment as a member of the
judiciary by any legal impediment;
(c) is able to express oneself in the Maltese and English
language and able to communicate in a clear and
concise manner;
(d) possesses integrity, correctness and honesty in public
and private life;
(e) has knowledge of the law, of court procedures and
professional experience;
(f)

is industrious, able to work under pressure, diligent,
analytical and able to make decisions;

(g) is impartial and independent;
(h) is not involved in any commercial or business activity

Vacancies in the
office of member
of the judiciary.
Added by:
XLIII.2020.4.

64

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
and does not have a financial situation which raises
doubt about the ability to perform judicial duties in a
proper manner;

Tenure of office of
judges.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.48;
XLV.2020.5;
LV.2020.2.

(i)

is able to work in a collegial environment; and

(j)

possesses knowledge of the Code of Ethics for members
of the Judiciary and is willing to undertake continuing
professional development.

97. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this article, a
judge of the Superior Courts shall vacate his office upon reaching
the age of sixty-five (65) years:
Provided that a judge of the Superior Courts shall inform the
Chief Justice and the President of Malta of this decision before he
reaches the age of sixty-five (65) years once he chooses to remain in
office until he reaches the age of sixty-eight (68) years.
(2) A judge of the superior courts shall not be removed from his
office except as provided in articles 101B and 101C of the
Constitution.

Acting Chief
Justice and acting
judges.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.49.

98. (1) If the office of Chief Justice is vacant or if the Chief
Justice is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his
office, then, until a person has been appointed to and has assumed
the functions of that office or until the Chief Justice has resumed
those functions, as the case may be, those functions shall (except to
such extent, if any, as other provision is made by law) be performed
by such one of the other judges of the Superior Courts as may be
designated in that behalf by the President, acting in accordance
with the advice of the Prime Minister.
(2) If the office of any judge of the Superior Courts (other than
the Chief Justice) is vacant or if any such judge is appointed to act
as Chief Justice or is for any reason unable to perform the functions
of his office, the President, acting in accordance with the advice of
the Prime Minister, may appoint a person qualified for appointment
as a judge of the Superior Courts to act as a judge of those Courts:
Provided that a person may be so appointed notwithstanding that
he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
(3) Any person appointed under sub-article (2) of this article to
act as a judge of the Superior Courts shall continue so to act for the
period of his appointment or, if no such period is specified, until his
appointment is revoked by the President acting in accordance with
the advice of the Prime Minister.

Inferior Courts.

99. There shall be in and for Malta such inferior courts having
such powers and jurisdiction as may be provided by any law for the
time being in force in Malta.

Magistrates.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.50;
XIV.2007.5;
XLIV. 2016.6;
XLIII.2020.5;
XLV.2020.6;
LV.2020.3.

100. (1) Magistrates of the inferior courts shall be appointed by
the President acting in accordance with the recommendation made by
the Judicial Appointments Committee established by article 96A of the
Constitution.
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed to or to act
in the office of magistrate of the inferior courts unless he has

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

65

practised as an advocate in Malta for a period of, or periods
amounting in the aggregate to, not less than seven years.
(3) Without prejudice to sub-article (4), a magistrate of the
inferior courts shall vacate his office upon reaching the age of
sixty-five (65) years:
Provided that a magistrate of the inferior courts shall inform
the Chief Justice and the President of Malta of this decision before he
reaches the age of sixty-five (65) years once he chooses to remain in
office until he reaches the age of sixty-eight (68) years.
(4) The provisions of sub-article (2) of article 97 of the
Constitution shall apply to a magistrate of the inferior courts.
101. A judge of the Superior Courts or a magistrate of the
inferior courts shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he
has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for
the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by any law for
the time being in force in Malta.

Oaths to be taken
by judges and
magistrates.

101A. (1) There shall be a Commission for the Administration
of Justice which shall consist of the President, who shall be the
Chairman, and nine other members as follows:

Commission for
the Administration
of Justice.
Added by:
IX.1994.2.
Amendeed by:
XLIV. 2016.7;
XLV.2020.7.

(a) the Chief Justice who shall be Deputy Chairman and
shall preside over the Commission in the absence of
the Chairman;
(b) two members elected for a period of four years by the
judges of the Superior Court from among themselves;
(c) two members elected for a period of four years by the
magistrates of the Inferior Courts from among
themselves;
(d) two members appointed for a period of four years as to
one by the Prime Minister and as to the other by the
Leader of the Opposition, being in each case, a person
of at least forty-five years of age, and who enjoys the
general respect of the public and a reputation of
integrity and honesty;
(e) the President of the Chamber of Advocates, ex officio.
(2)

The President shall have an original vote.

(3) The members elected to the Commission for the
Administration of Justice shall be elected in accordance with such
rules as may be prescribed by the person or authority referred to in
sub-article (7) of article 46 of this Constitution.
(4)

(a) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed or
continue to hold office as a member of the
Commission for the Administration of Justice:
(i)

if he is a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary, a
Member of the House of Representatives or a
member of a local government authority; or
(ii) if he has been convicted of any crime punishable
by imprisonment for any term; or

66

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(iii) if he is disqualified to be elected as a member of
the House of Representatives for any of the
reasons stated in paragraphs (a), (c), (d), (e), (f),
(g) or (h) of sub-article (1) of article 54 of this
Constitution.
(b) The office of a member of the Commission for the
Administration of Justice shall become vacant if any
circumstances arise that if he were not a member of the
Commission he would not qualify for membership
thereof, and a member of the Commission may abstain
or be challenged in the same circumstances as a judge
of the superior courts.
(5)

(a) Where a person fills a vacancy caused by a member of
the Commission for the Administration of Justice
ceasing to be such a member for any reason, other than
the expiration of the period of office, such person shall
hold office for the unexpired period of office of the
member he replaces.
(b) Where a member of the Commission has been
challenged or has abstained, the President acting in
accordance with his own deliberate judgement shall
appoint as a substitute member to sit on the
Commission, a person who in his opinion has as far as
may be the same qualities and qualifications as the
member substituted.
(c) Where the members who, are to be elected under
paragraph (c) and (d) of sub-article (1) of this article,
or who are to be appointed under paragraph (e) of the
same sub-article, are not so elected or appointed
within two weeks from a call for the purpose by the
President, the President who in making such
appointment shall act in accordance with his own
deliberate judgement shall himself appoint members in
their stead who where possible in his opinion shall
have the same qualities and qualifications as such
members.

(6)

(a) The Commission for the Administration of Justice
shall at all times have a committee for Advocates and
Legal Procurators which shall have such composition,
functions, powers and duties as may be assigned to it
by law. The Commission shall in the exercise of any of
its functions in relation to the professions of
Advocates and Legal Procurators act through the said
committees in such manner and subject to such review
as may by the said law be provided.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of
this sub-article, the Commission shall refer to the
Committee for Advocates and Legal Procurators
(hereinafter in this article referred to as "the
Committee") any matter concerning the misconduct of
an advocate or legal procurator in the exercise of their

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
profession, and, saving in the case of an appeal, the
Commission shall not act otherwise than on receipt of,
and in accordance with, the findings of the Committee
in any such matter. So however that, where a report of
findings by the Committee has not been submitted to
the Commission within two months from the day on
which the matter was brought before the Committee,
or within such further period or periods as the
Commission may allow, which shall in no case, except
for very exceptional reasons, exceed a further four
months, the Commission shall thereupon itself
investigate and determine the matter.
(c) Without prejudice to the provisions of the foregoing
paragraph the Commission may appoint such other
committees to assist it on any matter falling within its
functions as it may deem fit.
(7) In the exercise of their functions the members of the
Commission and of any of its committees shall act on their
individual judgement and shall not be subject to the direction or
control of any person or authority.
(8) Sub-articles (2) and (3) of article 121 of this Constitution
shall apply to any committee of the Commission.
(9) There shall be a secretary of the Commission for the
Administration of Justice who shall also act as secretary of any
committee of the Commission. The Secretary of the Commission
shall be appointed by the Commission from among public officers
assigned to the Courts or from among members of the legal
professions. The Secretary shall hold office until such time as his
appointment is terminated by the Commission.
(10) A person appointed as a member of the Commission for the
Administration of Justice or any of its committees may be removed
from office by the President, acting in accordance with the advice
of the body or the holder of the office appointing such member, but
he may be removed only for inability to discharge the functions of
his office (whether arising from infirmity of mind or body or any
other cause) or for misbehaviour.
(11) The functions of the Commission for the Administration of
Justice shall be:
(a) to supervise the workings of all the superior and
inferior courts and to make such recommendations to
the Minister responsible for justice as to the remedies,
which appear to it, conductive to a more efficient
functioning of such courts;
(b) to advise the Minister responsible for justice on any
matter relating to the organisation of the
administration of justice;
(c) to exercise, subject to article 101B of this Constitution,
discipline on judges and magistrates;
(d) to draw up a code or codes of ethics regulating the
conduct of members of the judiciary;

67

68

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(e) on the advice of the Committee for Advocates and
Legal Procurators to draw up a code or codes of ethics
regulating the professional conduct of members of
those professions:
Provided that where such advice is not given within
such time as the Commission may establish, the
Commission may draw up such code or codes without
the necessity of such advice;
(f)

to draw the attention of any judge or magistrate on any
matter, in any court in which he sits, which may not be
conducive to an efficient and proper functioning of such
court;

(g) to exercise, in accordance with any law, discipline
over advocates and legal procurators practising their
profession; and
(h) such other function as may be assigned to it by law.
(12) The Commission for the Administration of Justice shall
each year make a report to the Minister responsible for justice on
its activities during the previous calendar year, and shall at any
time, when it deems fit or as may be required by the said Minister,
make a report on any particular matter to the said Minister.
(13) The powers of the President under any law with regard to
the subrogation of judges and magistrates and to the assignment of
d u t i es o f j u d g e s a n d m a g i s t r a t es s h a l l b e e x e r c i s e d o n t h e
recommendation of the Chief Justice:
Provided that where the Chief Justice fails to make a
recommendation to the President, the President shall exercise this
power on the advice of the Minister responsible for justice:
Provided further that in any such case the Minister responsible
for justice shall immediately publish in the Gazette, a notice of that
fact together with the reasons therefore, and he shall make a statement
of such fact in the House not later than the second sitting immediately
after he has so advised the President.
(14) Subject to provisions of sub-article (1) of article 101C of the
Constitution, the question whether the Commission for the Administration of Justice has validly performed any function vested in it by
or under this Constitution shall not be enquired into in any court.
Discipline of
judges and
magistrates.
Added by:
XLIV. 2016.8.
Amended by:
XLV.2020.8.

101B. (1) There shall be a Committee for Judges and
Magistrates (hereinafter referred to as "the Committee") which
shall be a subcommittee of the Commission for the Administration
of Justice and which shall consist of three members of the judiciary
who are not members of the Commission for the Administration of
J us t ic e a n d w h o s h a l l be el e c t e d f r o m a m o n g s t j ud g e s a n d
magistrates according to regulations issued by the Commission for
the Administration of Justice so however that in disciplinary
proceedings against a magistrate two of the three members shall be
magistrates and in the case of disciplinary proceedings against a
judge two of the three members shall be judges.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(2) The Chairman of the Committee shall be elected by
the members of the Committee from amongst themselves.
(3) Any member of the Committee may be challenged
and shall abstain in the same circumstances as a judge of the
Superior Courts may be challenged or may abstain. Where a
member has been challenged or has abstained, the Commission for
the Administration of Justice shall appoint a substitute member.
(4) The Committee shall exercise discipline on judges
and magistrates in the manner prescribed in this article.
(5) Disciplinary proceedings against a judge or a
magistrate shall be commenced upon a complaint in writing and
containing definite charges made to the Committee by the Chief
Justice or by the Minister responsible for justice, for breach of the
provisions of the Code of Ethics for Members of the Judiciary or of a
code or disciplinary rules for members of the judiciary promulgated
according to the same procedure according to which the said Code of
Ethics is promulgated which are from time to time applicable to the
members of the judiciary. The complaint shall also include the
grounds upon which each of such charges is based.
(6) The Committee shall, upon receipt of a complaint
under sub-article (5), notify the said complaint to the judge or
magistrate against whom it is made granting him or her a
reasonable time to reply.
(7) If, following prima facie consideration of the
complaint and of the reply, the Committee considers that there are
not sufficient grounds to commence disciplinary proceedings, the
Committee shall refrain from further consideration of the case.
(8) If, following the consideration of the complaint and
of the reply as referred to in sub-article (7), the Committee
considers that there are sufficient grounds to continue the
disciplinary proceedings the Committee shall appoint a date for
the hearing.
(9) Proceedings before the Committee shall be held in
camera unless the judge or magistrate against whom the
proceedings are taken requests otherwise. The complainant or his
representative and the judge or magistrate against whom the
proceedings are taken shall have a right to be present during the
whole of the proceedings, to produce witnesses in support or in
defence of the charges set in the complaint, and to be assisted by
an advocate or a legal procurator. The Commission for the
Administration of Justice may also appoint an advocate to act as a
special independent prosecutor in the disciplinary proceedings.
(10) If the Committee finds that the judge or magistrate

69

70

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
has breached the Code of Ethics for Members of the Judiciary it
shall:
(a) if it considers that the breach is of a minor nature,
either issue a warning or impose a pecuniary penalty
recoverable as a civil debt payable to the Secretary of
the Commission for the Administration of Justice, not
exceeding ten per centum of the annual salary of the
judge or magistrate as at the time established
according to law;
(b) if it considers that the breach is of a serious nature it
may suspend the judge or magistrate from the exercise
of his duties for a period of not more than six months
on half of his salary and allowances as recoverable at
the time;
(c) if it considers that the breach is of such a serious
nature as to merit the removal of the judge or
magistrate from office, or is based on the grounds of
incapacity to perform the functions of his office (both
whether for bodily or mental illness or for any other
reason), it shall report its findings to the Commission
for the Administration of Justice which shall consider
whether the evidence proves the case prima facie and,
if it considers that there is such degree of proof, the
Commission shall suspend the judge or magistrate
concerned and shall proceed with the hearing of the
case. During the period during which a judge or
magistrate is suspended in accordance with the
provisions of this paragraph, which shall not exceed
six (6) months, the judge or magistrate shall be entitled
to half the salary and allowances relative to the office
and after the expiry of such a period of six (6) months
he shall resume receiving his salary and all allowances
for his post irrespective of whether or not the case
referred has been concluded. In the event that the
Commission for the Administration of Justice
considers that the breach under investigation merits
the removal of the judge or magistrate from office, it
shall proceed to advise the President to remove the
judge or magistrate from office for proven misconduct
or proven incapacity to perform the functions of his
office:
Provided that in the event that the proceedings before the
Commission for the Administration of Justice do not
result in the removal of the member of the judiciary, then
the member of the judiciary shall be paid the salary and
allowances which have been held throughout the period
of suspension.
(11) The Committee may also upon the request of the Chief
Justice order that a judge or a magistrate be suspended from the
performance of his duties on serious medical grounds for a definite
period during which the said judge or magistrate shall continue to

71

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
receive his full salary and allowances. The procedure laid down in
this article in respect of disciplinary proceedings shall apply
mutatis mutandis in the case of any proceedings taken under this
sub-article.
(12) (a) There shall be a right of appeal to the Commission for
the Administration of Justice from decisions of the
Committee by the judge or magistrate against whom
the Committee makes a finding.
(b) The appeal shall be filed with the Secretary of the
Commission for the Administration of Justice by not
later than twenty days from when the Committee
delivers its decision.
(c) The filing of an appeal as aforesaid shall suspend the
execution of the decision of the Committee.
(d) The Commission for the Administration of Justice may
from time to time establish rules of procedure for such
appeals.
(e) The President of Malta shall not form part of the
Commission for the Administration of Justice when
the said Commission is hearing an appeal from a
decision of the Committee.
(13) Proceedings before the Committee shall be concluded
within a period of one year and appeal proceedings before the
Commission for the Administration of Justice shall be concluded
within a further period of six months.
(14) In the exercise of their function under this article the
Commission for the Administration of Justice and the Committee
for Judges and Magistrates shall have all the powers as are assigned
to the First Hall of the Civil Court by the Code of Organization and
Civil Procedure or by any law from time to time regulating the
powers of Courts of civil jurisdiction.

Cap. 12.

(15) In the exercise of their functions the members of the
Committee shall act on their own individual judgment and shall not
be subject to the direction or control of any other person or
authority.
(16) The provisions of this article shall be without prejudice to
the application of sub-articles (2) and (3) of article 97 of this
Constitution wherever they may apply.
101C. (1) There shall be a right of appeal to the Constitutional
Court from a decision of the Commission for the Administration of
Justice’s finding for the removal of a judge or magistrate and from the
decision of the Commission for the Administration of Justice delivered
in accordance with article 101B(12).
(2)
The appeal shall be filed within eight working days from the
date when the decision of the Commission for the Administration of
Justice is communicated to the judge or magistrate.

Appeal from the
decisions of the
Commission for
the Administration
of Justice.
Added by:
XLV.2020.9.

72

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(3) The filing of an appeal in terms of sub-article (1) shall suspend
the execution of the decision of the Commission for the
Administration of Justice.
CHAPTER IX

Finance
Consolidated
Fund.

102. (1) All revenues and other moneys raised or received by
Malta (not being revenues or other moneys payable into some other
fund, being a fund established by or under any law for the time
being in force in Malta for a specific purpose) shall, unless
Parliament otherwise provides, be paid into and form one
Consolidated Fund.
(2) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund
except to meet expenditure that is charged upon the Fund by this
Constitution or any other law for the time being in force in Malta or
where the issue of those moneys has been authorised by an
Appropriation Act or under article 104 of this Constitution.
(3) No moneys shall be withdrawn from any public fund other
than the Consolidated Fund unless the issue of those moneys has
been authorised by or under any law for the time being in force in
Malta.
(4) No moneys shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund
or any other public fund except in the manner prescribed by or
under any law.
(5) The costs, charges and expenses incidental to the collection
and management of the Consolidated Fund shall be a charge on the
Fund.

Authorisation of
expenditure from
Consolidated
Fund.

103. (1) The Minister responsible for finance shall cause to be
prepared and laid before the House of Representatives before, or
not later than thirty days after, the commencement of each financial
year estimates of the revenues and expenditure of Malta for that
year.
(2) The heads of expenditure contained in the estimates (other
than the expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund by this
Constitution or any other law for the time being in force in Malta)
shall be included in a bill, to be known as an appropriation bill,
providing for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums
necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those
sums for the purposes specified therein.
(3)

If in respect of any financial year it is found (a) that the amount appropriated by the Appropriation Act
for any purpose is insufficient, or that a need has
arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no
amount has been appropriated by that Act; or
(b) that any moneys have been expended for any purpose
in excess of the amount (if any) appropriated for the
purpose by that Act,

73

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall
be laid before the House of Representatives and the heads of any
such expenditure shall be included in a supplementary
appropriation bill.
104. Parliament may make provision under which, if the
Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year has not come
into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister
responsible for finance may authorise the withdrawal of moneys
from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting such
expenditure as he may consider necessary to carry on the
government of Malta until the expiration of four months from the
beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the
Act, whichever is the earlier.

Authorisation of
expenditure before
appropriation.

105. (1) Parliament may provide for the establishment of a
Contingencies Fund and for authorising the Minister responsible
for finance, if he is satisfied that there has arisen an urgent and
unforeseen need for expenditure for which no other provision
exists, to make advances from that Fund to meet that need.

Contingencies
Fund.

(2) Where any advance is made in accordance with sub-article
(1) of this article a supplementary estimate shall be presented and a
supplementary appropriation bill shall be introduced as soon as
practicable for the purpose of replacing the amount so advanced.
106. (1) The public debt of Malta shall be a charge upon the
Consolidated Fund and other public funds of Malta.

Public debt.

(2) In this article references to the public debt of Malta include
references to the interest on that debt, sinking fund payments and
redemption moneys in respect of that debt and the costs, charges
and expenses incidental to the management of that debt.
107. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of articles 101A and
101B, there shall be paid to the holders of the offices to which this
article applies such salaries as may be prescribed by or under any
law.
(2) The salaries and any allowances payable to the holders of
the offices to which this article applies shall be a charge on the
Consolidated Fund.
(3) The salary payable to the holder of any office to which this
article applies and his terms of office, other than allowances, shall
not be altered to his disadvantage after his appointment, and for the
purposes of this sub-article, in so far as the salary or the terms of
service of any person depend upon the option of that person, the
salary or terms for which he opts shall be deemed to be more
advantageous to him than any others for which he might have
opted.
(4) This article applies to the offices referred to in articles 48,
91, 95(6), 100, 109, 118 and 120 of the Constitution.

Remuneration in
respect of certain
offices.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.52;
XVII.1997.2;
XLIV. 2016.9.

74
Auditor General.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.53.
Substituted by:
XVII.1997.3.
Amended:
XLIV. 2016.10.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
108. (1) There shall be an Auditor General whose office shall
be a public office who shall have the functions as provided in the
following provisions of this article.
(2) The Auditor General shall be an officer of the House of
Representatives and shall be appointed by the President acting in
accordance with a resolution of the House of Representatives
supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the
members in the House:
Provided that when a person who is not a member of the
House of Representatives is elected to be the Speaker of the House
of Representatives, he shall not be treated as a member of the
House for the purpose of establishing the majority required by this
sub-article.
(3)

(a) Subject to the provisions of sub-article (4) of this
article the Auditor General shall hold office for a
period of five years from the date of his appointment
and shall be eligible for reappointment for one further
period of five years.
(b) Where the Auditor General has been appointed from
among public officers and at the end of his
appointment is below the retiring age in the public
service, the person so appointed shall revert to the
public service and shall continue to enjoy the salary
and allowances referred to in sub-article (6).
(c) It shall not be lawful for the Auditor General, during
his tenure of such office, to hold any other office of
profit or otherwise with the Government of Malta or
with any commercial or professional venture
whatsoever.

(4)

(a) The Auditor General may at any time be removed or
suspended from his office by the President, upon an
address from the House of Representatives supported
by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all members
in the House, praying for such removal on the ground
of proved inability to perform the functions of his
office (whether arising from infirmity of body or mind
or any other cause) or proved misbehaviour, and the
provisions of the proviso to sub-article (2) of this
article shall also apply for the purpose of establishing
the majority required under this sub-article.
(b) At any time when Parliament is not in session, the
Auditor General may be suspended from his office by
the President, acting in accordance with his own
deliberate judgement, for inability to perform the
functions of his office or misbehaviour proved to the
satisfaction of the President; but any such suspension
shall not continue in force beyond two months after
the beginning of the next session of Parliament.

(5)

The accounts (a) of all departments and offices of the Government of

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

75

Malta, including the office of the Public Service
Commission, and the office of the Clerk of the House
of Representatives and of all Superior and Inferior
Courts of Malta, and
(b) of such other public authorities or other bodies
administering, holding, or using funds belonging
directly or indirectly to the Government of Malta as
may be prescribed by or under any law for the time
being in force in Malta,
shall be audited and reported upon annually by the Auditor General
to the House of Representatives and for that purpose the Auditor
General or any person authorised by him in that behalf shall have
access to all books, records, returns and other documents relating to
those accounts.
(6)

(a) There shall be paid to the Auditor General such salary
and such allowances as may from time to time be
prescribed or allowed for a Judge of the Superior
Courts.
(b) Such salary and allowances shall be a charge on the
Consolidated Fund and the provisions of sub-article
(3) of article 107 of the Constitution shall apply to
such salary.

(7) The Auditor General shall not enter upon the duties of his
office unless he has taken and subscribed before the President the
oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office
as may be prescribed by any law for the time being in force in
Malta.
(8) Parliament may by law from time to time provide for the
manner in which the reports of the Auditor General shall be made.
(9)

(a) There shall also be a Deputy Auditor General whose
office shall be a public office and who shall have such
functions as the Auditor General may from time to
time delegate to him and who shall, whenever the
office of Auditor General is temporarily vacant, and
until a new Auditor General is appointed, and
whenever the holder of the office is absent from Malta
or on vacation or is for any reason unable to perform
the functions of his office, perform the functions of
Auditor General.
(b) The provisions of sub-article (2), paragraphs (a) and
(c) of sub-article (3), sub-article (4), paragraph (b) of
sub-article (6) and sub-article (7) of this article shall
apply to the Deputy Auditor General.
(c) There shall be paid to the Deputy Auditor General
such salary and such allowances as may from time to
time be prescribed or allowed to a Magistrate of the
Inferior Courts.
(d) Where the Deputy Auditor General has been appointed
from among public officers and at the end of his

Deputy Auditor
General.

76

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
appointment is below the retiring age in the public
service, the person so appointed shall revert to the
public service and shall continue to enjoy the salary
and allowances referred to in this sub-article.

National Audit
Office.

(10) (a) There shall be a National Audit Office consisting of
the Auditor General, who shall be the head of that
office, the Deputy Auditor General and such other
officers, appointed by the Auditor General, as the
Auditor General may consider necessary to assist him
in the proper discharge of his office, and the
provisions of article 110 of this Constitution shall not
apply to the officers appointed to the National Audit
Office.
(b) Parliament may from time to time by law provide for
the manner in which funds shall be allocated to the
National Audit Office and in the manner whereby the
accounts of the National Audit Office shall be audited
and reported upon.
(11) Nothing in this article shall be construed as precluding the
grant of any other functions or powers on the Auditor General or
the National Audit Office by or under any law for the time being in
force.
(12) In the exercise of their functions under the Constitution the
Auditor General and the Deputy Auditor General shall not be
subject to the authority or control of any person.
CHAPTER X

The Public Service
Public Service
Commission.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.54.

109. (1) There shall be a Public Service Commission for Malta
which shall consist of a chairman, a deputy chairman and from one
to three other members.
(2) The members of the Public Service Commission shall be
appointed by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of
the Prime Minister given after he has consulted the Leader of the
Opposition.
(3) A person shall not be qualified to hold office as a member
of the Public Service Commission if he is a Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary, a member of, or a candidate for election to, the
House of Representatives, a member of a local government
authority or if he is a public officer.
(4) A member of the Public Service Commission shall not,
within a period of three years commencing with the day on which
he last held office as a member, be eligible for appointment to or to
act in any public office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this article, the office of a
member of the Public Service Commission shall become vacant (a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his
appointment or at such earlier time as may be specified

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

77

in the instrument by which he was appointed; or
(b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a
member of the Commission, would cause him to be
disqualified for appointment as such.
(6) A member of the Public Service Commission may be
removed from office by the President, acting in accordance with the
advice of the Prime Minister, but he may be removed only for
inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising
from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for
misbehaviour.
(7) If the office of a member of the Public Service Commission
is vacant or if a member is for any reason unable to perform the
functions of his office, the President, acting in accordance with the
advice of the Prime Minister, given after he has consulted the
Leader of the Opposition, may appoint a person who is qualified to
be appointed to be a member to be a temporary member of the
Commission; and any person so appointed shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-articles (5) and (6) of this article, cease to be
such a member when a person has been appointed to fill the
vacancy or, as the case may be, when the member who was unable
to perform the functions of his office resumes those functions.
110. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, power
to make appointments to public offices and to remove and to
exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in any
such offices shall vest in the Prime Minister, acting on the
recommendation of the Public Service Commission:
Provided that the Prime Minister may, acting on the
recommen-dation of the Public Service Commission, delegate in
writing, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the
instrument of delegation, any of the powers referred to in this subarticle to such public officer or other authority as may be specified
in that instrument.
(2)

A delegation of a power under this article (a) shall be without prejudice to the exercise of that power
by the Prime Minister acting on the recommendation
of the Public Service Commission;
(b) may authorise the public officer or other authority
concerned to exercise that power either with or
without reference to the Public Service Commission;
and
(c) in respect of recruitment to public offices from outside
the public service, shall, unless such recruitment is
made after a public examination advertised in the
Gazette, be exercised only through an employment
service provided out of public funds which ensures
that no distinction, exclusion or preference is made or
given in favour or against any person by reason of his
political opinion and which provides opportunity for
employment solely in the best interests of the public

Appointment, etc.,
of public officers.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.55.

78

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
service and of the nation generally.
(3) (a) An appeal shall lie to the Prime Minister, acting in
accordance with the recomm endation of the Public Service
Commission, from any decision of a public officer or authority to
remove any person from a public office in exercise of power
delegated under sub-article (1) of this article:
Provided that such right of appeal shall be without
prejudice to any such other right of appeal as may be provided
under article 121(1) of this Constitution in respect of the exercise
of any other power delegated under sub-article (1) of this article.
(b) A right of appeal under this article shall be exercised
in accordance with such provision relating to procedure as may be
prescribed by the Public Service Commission under article 121(1)
of this Constitution:
Provided that any procedure so prescribed shall be the same
for all classes of public officers.
(c) Where an appeal is brought under paragraph (b) of this
sub-article by any public officer he shall, upon the consideration of
the appeal by the Public Service Commission, have the right to be
heard by the Commission in person and to be assisted by a
representative of any trade union to which he belongs.
(4) No person shall be appointed under this article to or to act
in any office on the personal staff of the President except with the
approval of the President.
(5)

The provisions of this article shall not apply in relation to (a) the offices referred to in articles 91, 92 (other than
sub-article (4) thereof), 94, 95(6), 100, 108 and 111 of
this Constitution; or
(b) appointments to act in any public office for two
months or less in so far as the recommendation of the
Public Service Commission is required for any such
appointment; or
(c) appointments to the offices referred to in article 92(4)
and appointments on transfer to and from the offices
referred to in article 112 of this Constitution.

(6) Recruitment for employment with any body established by
t he Co nst it ut io n or by o r un de r any ot her l aw, o r wi th a ny
partnership or other body in which the Government of Malta, or
any such body as aforesaid, have a controlling interest or over
which they have effective control, shall, unless such recruitment is
made after a public examination duly advertised, be made through
an employment service as provided in sub-article (2) of this article.
Principal
representatives of
Malta abroad.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.56.

111. (1) Power to appoint persons to hold or act in the offices
to which this article applies and to remove persons so appointed
f r o m a n y su c h o ff i c e s h a l l v e st i n t h e P r e si d e n t , a c t i n g i n
accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister:
Provided that in respect of any person selected for appointment
from the public service the Prime Minister shall, before giving his

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

79

advice under the provisions of this article, consult with the Public
Service Commission and, on being removed from the office to
which he has been appointed under the provisions of this article,
the person so appointed shall revert to the rank which he held in the
public service immediately before such appointment.
(2) The offices to which this article applies are the offices of
a n y A m b a s s a d o r, H i g h C o m m i s s i o n e r o r o t h e r p r i n c i p a l
representative of Malta in any other country.
112. (1) Power to make appointments on transfer to and from
the offices to which this article applies shall vest in the Prime
M i n i s t e r a c t i n g a f t e r c o n s u l t at i o n w i t h t h e P u b l i c S e r v i c e
Commission:

Appointment on
transfer in respect
of certain offices.

Provided that the person appointed to any such office under the
provisions of this article shall, on being transferred from that
office, revert to the rank which he held in the public service
immediately before his appointment to that office.
(2)

The offices to which this article applies are (a) offices the holders of which are required to reside
outside Malta for the proper discharge of their
functions; and
(b) such offices in the Ministry responsible for the
external affairs of Malta as may, from time to time, be
designated by the Prime Minister.

113. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 114 of this
Constitution the law applicable to any benefits to which this article
applies shall, in relation to any person who has been granted or who
is eligible for the grant of such benefits be that in force on the
relevant date or any later law that is not less favourable to that
person.
(2)

In this article "the relevant date" means (a) in relation to any benefits granted before the appointed
day, the date on which those benefits were granted;
(b) in relation to any benefits granted or to be granted on
or after the appointed day to or in respect of any
person who was a public officer before that date, the
day before the appointed day; and
(c) in relation to any benefits granted or to be granted to
or in respect of any person who becomes a public
officer on or after the appointed day, the date on which
he becomes a public officer.

(3) Where a person is entitled to exercise an option as to which
of two or more laws shall apply in his case, the law for which he
opts shall, for the purposes of this article, be deemed to be more
favourable to him than the other law or laws.
(4) Any benefit to which this article applies (not being a
benefit that is a charge upon some other public fund of Malta) shall
be a charge upon the Consolidated Fund.

Protection of
pension rights.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.57.

80

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
(5) This article applies to any benefits payable under any law
providing for the grant of pensions, gratuities or compensation to
persons who are or have been public officers in respect of their
service in the public service or to the widows, children, dependants or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such
service.
(6) References to the law applicable to any benefits to which
this article applies include (without prejudice to their generality)
references to any law relating to the time at which and the manner
in which any person may retire in order to become eligible for those
benefits.
(7) Nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law
shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this
article to the extent that the law in question makes provision
whereby any benefits to which this article applies are or may be
reduced or withheld (a) until the person eligible therefor reaches the age of
sixty years, or such lower age as may be determined by
or under a law, if such person is in receipt of any
income to which this sub-article applies and such
provision is made in order that any such income
together with any uncommuted benefits aforesaid do
not in the aggregate exceed such amount as may be
determined by, under or in accordance with any law,
being an amount not less than the salary from time to
time payable in respect of the post held by such person
on retirement, taking account only, if such salary is
incremental, of the corresponding increments earned
prior to retirement; or
(b) in order to ensure compliance with any legal
requirements relating to any of the purposes of
paragraph (a) of this sub-article; or
(c) if the person eligible therefor ceases to be a citizen of
Malta.
(8) The income to which sub-article (7) of this article applies is
any remuneration in respect of, or other income deriving from, any
employment, work, service, office, trade, business, profession or
vocation, or from any pension, allowance, gratuity or similar
payment in respect of any such employment or other source of
income.

Grant and
withholding of
pensions, etc.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.58.

114. (1) Where any benefits to which this article applies can
be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended by any person or
authority under any law those benefits shall not be so withheld,
reduced in amount or suspended without the concurrence of the
Public Service Commission, unless such benefits are reduced or
withheld in accordance with any law referred to in sub-article (7) of
article 113 of this Constitution.
(2) The Public Service Commission shall not concur under subarticle (1) of this article in action taken on the ground that any
person who holds or has held any of the offices referred to in

81

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
articles 91, 95(6), 100 and 108 of this Constitution has been guilty
of misbehaviour unless he has been removed from office by reason
of such misbehaviour.
(3) This article applies to any benefits payable under any law
providing for the grant of pensions, gratuities or compensation to
persons who are or have been public officers in respect of their
service in the public service or to the widows, children, dependants
or personal representatives of such persons in respect of such
service.
115. The question whether (a) the Public Service Commission has validly performed
any function vested in it by or under this Constitution;

Protection of
Public Service
Commission from
legal proceedings.

(b) any member of the Public Service Commission or any
public officer or other authority has validly performed
any function delegated to such member, public officer
or authority in pursuance of the provisions of subarticle (1) of article 110 of this Constitution; or
(c) any member of the Public Service Commission or any
public officer or other authority has validly performed
any other function in relation to the work of the
Commission or in relation to any such function as is
referred to in the preceding paragraph,
shall not be enquired into in any court.
CHAPTER XA

Added by:
XIII.2001.4.

Local Councils
115A.The State shall adopt a system of local government
whereby the territory of Malta shall be divided into such number of
localities as may by law be from time to time determined, each
locality to be administered by a Local Council elected by the
residents of the locality and established and operating in terms of
such law as may from time to time be in force.

Local Councils.

CHAPTER XI

Miscellaneous
116. A right of action for a declaration that any law is invalid on
any grounds other than inconsistency with the provisions of articles
33 to 45 of this Constitution shall appertain to all persons without
distinction and a person bringing such an action shall not be
required to show any personal interest in support of his action.

Actions on validity
of laws.

117. (1) It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or belong to
any association of persons who are organised and trained or
organised and equipped for the purpose of enabling them to be
employed for the use or display of physical force in promoting any
political object.

Prohibition of
certain
associations.

(2) The provisions of this article shall be enforced in such
manner as may be provided by Parliament.

82
Broadcasting
Authority.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.59.

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
118. (1) There shall be a Broadcasting Authority for Malta
which shall consist of a chairman and such number of other
members not being less than four as may be prescribed by any law
for the time being in force in Malta.
(2) The members of the Broadcasting Authority shall be
appointed by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of
the Prime Minister given after he has consulted the Leader of the
Opposition.
(3) A person shall not be qualified to hold office as a member
of the Broadcasting Authority if he is a Minister, a Parliamentary
Secretary, a member of, or candidate for election to, the House of
Representatives, a member of a local government authority or if he
is a public officer.
(4) A member of the Broadcasting Authority shall not, within a
period of three years commencing with the day on which he last
held office or acted as a member, be eligible for appointment to or
to act in any public office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this article, the office of a
member of the Broadcasting Authority shall become vacant (a) at the expiration of five years from the date of his
appointment or at such earlier time as may be specified
in the instrument by which he was appointed; or
(b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a
member of the Authority, would cause him to be
disqualified for appointment as such.
(6) A member of the Broadcasting Authority may be removed
from office by the President, acting in accordance with the advice
of the Prime Minister, but he may be removed only for inability to
discharge the functions of his office (whether arising from infirmity
of mind or body or any other cause) or for misbehaviour.
(7) If the office of a member of the Broadcasting Authority is
vacant or if a member is for any reason unable to perform the
functions of his office, the President, acting in accordance with the
advice of the Prime Minister, given after he has consulted the
Leader of the Opposition, may appoint a person who is qualified to
be appointed to be a member to be a temporary member of the
Authority; and any person so appointed shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-articles (5) and (6) of this article, cease to be
such a member when a person has been appointed to fill the
vacancy or, as the case may be, when the member who was unable
to perform the functions of his office resumes those functions.
(8) In the exercise of its functions under article 119 (1) of this
Constitution the Broadcasting Authority shall not be subject to the
direction or control of any other person or authority.

Function of the
Broadcasting
Authority.

119. (1) It shall be the function of the Broadcasting Authority
to ensure that, so far as possible, in such sound and television
broadcasting services as may be provided in Malta, due impartiality
i s p reserved i n respect of m atters of p oliti cal or indu st rial
controversy or relating to current public policy and that

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

83

broadcasting facilities and time are fairly apportioned between
persons belonging to different political parties.
(2) The function of the Broadcasting Authority referred to in
sub-article (1) of this article shall be without prejudice to such
other functions and duties as may be conferred upon it by any law
for the time being in force in Malta.
120. (1) There shall be an Employment Commission for Malta
which shall consist of a chairman and four other members.
(2) The members of the Employment Commission shall be
appointed by the President who, in appointing the chairman shall
act in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister given after
he has consulted the Leader of the Opposition, in appointing two of
the four other members shall act in accordance with the advice of
the Prime Minister, and in appointing the other two members shall
act in accordance with the advice of the Leader of the Opposition.
(3) A person shall not be qualified to hold office as a member
of the Employment Commission if he is a Minister, a Parliamentary
Secretary, a member of, or a candidate for election to, the House of
Representatives, a member of a local government authority, or if he
is a public officer.
(4) A member of the Employment Commission shall not,
within a period of three years commencing with the day on which
he last held office or acted as a member, be eligible for appointment
to or to act in any public office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this article, the office of a
member of the Employment Commission shall become vacant (a) at the expiration of three years from the date of his
appointment; or
(b) if any circumstances arise that, if he were not a
member of the Commission, would cause him to be
disqualified for appointment as such.
(6) A member of the Employment Commission may be
removed from office by the President, acting in accordance with the
advice of the holder of the office on whose advice such member
was appointed, given, where applicable, as provided in sub-article
(2) of this article, but such member may be removed only for
inability to discharge the functions of his office (whether arising
from infirmity of mind or body or any other cause) or for
misbehaviour.
(7) If the office of a member of the Employment Commission
is vacant or if a member is for any reason unable to perform the
functions of his office, the President, acting in accordance with the
advice of the holder of the office on whose advice such member
was appointed, given, where applicable, as provided in sub-article
(2) of this article, may appoint a person who is qualified to be
appointed to be a member to be a temporary member of the
Commission; and any person so appointed shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-articles (5) and (6) of this article, cease to be
such a member when a person has been appointed to fill the

Employment
Commission.
Added by:
LVIII.1974.60.

84

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
vacancy or, as the case may be, when the member who was unable
to perform the functions of his office resumes those functions.
(8) It shall be the function of the Employment Commission to
ensure that, in respect of employment, no distinction, exclusion or
preference that is not justifiable in a democratic society is made or
given in favour or against any person by reason of his political
opinions.
(9) Any person who alleges that any distinction, exclusion or
preference as aforesaid has been made or given to his prejudice
may apply to the Employment Commission, in such manner and
within such time as may be prescribed, for redress.
(10) Parliament shall make provision conferring upon the
E m p l o y m e n t C o m m i ss i o n su ch p o w er s a s ar e n e c e ss ar y o r
desirable for the purpose of enabling the Commission effectively to
afford adequate redress and generally to carry out its function
under this Constitution.

Powers and
procedure of
Commissions.

121. (1) Any Commission established by this Constitution
may, with the consent of the Prime Minister or such other Minister
as may be authorised in that behalf by the Prime Minister by
regulation or otherwise regulate its own procedure and confer
powers and impose duties on any public officer or authority of the
Government of Malta for the purpose of the discharge of its
functions.
(2) Any Commission established by this Constitution may act
notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership or the absence of
any member and any proceedings thereof shall be valid
notwithstanding that some person who was not entitled so to do
took part therein.
(3) Any question proposed for decision at any meeting of any
Commission established by this Constitution shall be determined
by a majority of the votes of all the members thereof, and if on any
such question the votes are equally divided the member presiding
shall have and exercise a casting vote.
(4) For the purposes of sub-article (3) of this article, the
references to a member of the Electoral Commission shall be
con st rued as inclu ding a reference t o th e Chairman of that
Commission.
(5) The provisions of this article shall apply
Broadcasting Authority established by this Constitution.

Resignations.

to

the

122. (1) Any person who is appointed, elected or otherwise
selected to any office established by this Constitution (including
the office of the Prime Minister or other Minister or Parliamentary
Secretary) may resign from that office by writing under his hand
addressed to the person or authority by whom he was appointed,
elected or selected.
(2) The resignation of any person from any such office as
aforesa id shall take eff ect w hen t he wri ti ng si gn ifyi ng t he
resignation is received by the person or authority to whom it is

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

85

addressed or by any person authorised by that person or authority to
receive it.
123. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution,
where any person has vacated any office established by this
Constitution including the office of Prime Minister or other
Minister or Parliamentary Secretary, he may, if qualified, again be
appointed, elected or otherwise selected to hold that office in
accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

Reappointments,
etc.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.61;
XXIII.1989.8;
XVII.1997.4.

(2) Sub-article (1) of this article shall not apply to the office of
President, but shall apply to a person appointed to perform the
functions of President in accordance with arti cl e 4 9 of t he
Constitution.
(3) Where by this Constitution a power is conferred upon any
person or authority to make any appointment to any public office, a
person may be appointed to that office notwithstanding that some
other person may be holding that office, when that other person is
on leave of absence pending relinquishment of the office; and
where two or more persons are holding the same office by reason of
an appointment made in pursuance of this sub-article, then for the
purposes of any function conferred upon the holder of that office
the person last appointed shall be deemed to be the sole holder of
the office.
124. (1) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise
requires "Act of Parliament" means any law made by Parliament;
"the appointed day" means 21st September 1964;
"the Cabinet" means the Cabinet established by article 79 of this
Constitution;
"the Commonwealth" means Malta, any country to which article
23 of this Constitution applies and any dependency of any such
country;
"the Consolidated Fund" means the Consolidated Fund
established by article 102 of this Constitution;
"Constitutional Court" means the Constitutional Court
established by article 95 of this Constitution;
"financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on the
thirty-first day of December in any year or on such other date as
may be prescribed by Parliament;
"Gazette" means the Malta Government Gazette or any other
official journal substituted therefor published by order of the
Government of Malta;
"House" means the House of Representatives established by
article 51 of this Constitution;
"law" includes any instrument having the force of law and any
unwritten law and "lawful" and "lawfully" shall be construed
accordingly;

Interpretation.
Amended by:
LVIII.1974.62;
XXIX.1979.2;
XVII.1997.5.

86

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
"Malta" means the Island of Malta, the Island of Gozo and the
other islands of the Maltese Archipelago, including the territorial
waters thereof;
"oath of allegiance" means the oath of allegiance set out in the
Third Schedule to this Constitution or such other oath as may be
prescribed by Parliament;
"Parliament" means the Parliament of Malta;
"public office" means an office of emolument in the public
service;
"public officer" means the holder of any public office or of a
person appointed to act in any such office;
"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of subarticles (2) and (3) of this article, the service of the Government of
Malta in a civil capacity;
"session" means the sittings of the House of Representatives
beginning when it first meets after the commencement of this
Constitution or after the prorogation or dissolution of Parliament at
any time and terminating when Parliament is prorogued or is
dissolved without having been prorogued; `
"sitting" means a period during which the House of Representatives is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes
any period during which the House is in committee;
"the Speaker" and "Deputy Speaker" mean respectively the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker elected under article 59 of this
Constitution.
(2) In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires,
"the public service" includes service in the office of judge of the
Superior Courts, service in the office of Auditor General and
Deputy Auditor General, service in the office of magistrate of the
Inferior Courts and service in the office of a member of the Malta
Police Force.
(3) In this Constitution "the public service" does not include
service in the office of (i)

Prime Minister or other Minister, a Parliamentary Secretary, Speaker, Deputy Speaker, a
member of the House of Representatives, a
member of a Commission established by this
Constitution;
(ii) save where the holder of the office is selected
from the public service, an Ambassador, High
Commissioner or other principal representative
of Malta in any other country; or
(iii) save in so far as may be prescribed by
Parliament, a member of any council, board,
panel, committee or other similar body
established by or under any law.
(4) For the purposes of this Constitution a person shall not be
regarded as holding a public office by reason only of the fact that

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
he is in receipt of a pension or other like allowance in respect of
public service.
(5)

In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires (a) a reference to an appointment to any office shall be
construed as including a reference to an appointment
on promotion or transfer to that office and to the
appointment of a person to perform the functions of
that office during any period during which it is vacant
or during which the holder thereof is on vacation or
unable (whether by reason of absence or infirmity of
body or mind or any other cause) to perform those
functions; and
(b) a reference to the holder of an office by the term
designating his office or by reference to the provision
of this Constitution establishing that office shall be
construed as including a reference to any person for
the time being lawfully performing the functions of
that office.

(6) Where power is vested by this Constitution in any person or
authority to appoint any person to act in or perform the functions of
any office if the holder thereof is himself unable to perform those
functions, no such appointment shall be called in question on the
ground that the holder of the office was not unable to perform those
functions.
(7) References in this Constitution to the power to remove a
public officer from his office shall be construed as including
references to any power conferred by any law to require or permit
that officer to retire from the public service:
Provided that (a) nothing in this sub-article shall be construed as
conferring on any person or authority power to require
any person holding any of the offices referred to in
articles 91, 95(6), 100 or 108(1) or (9) of this
Constitution to retire from the public service; and
(b) the provisions of this sub-article shall not apply to any
power conferred by any law to permit a person to retire
from the public service where that person has
requested permission to retire from the public service
on proved medical grounds.
(8) Any provision in this Constitution that vests in any person
or authority power to remove any public officer from his office
shall be without prejudice to the power of any person or authority
to abolish any office or to any law providing for the compulsory
retirement of public officers generally or any class of public
officers on attaining an age specified therein.
(9) Where any power is conferred by this Constitution to make
any proclamation, order, rules or regulations or to give any
directions or to make any designation, the power shall be construed
as including a power, exercisable in like manner, to amend or

87

88

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
revoke any such proclamation, order, rules, regulations, directions
or designation.
(10) No provision of this Constitution that any person or
authority, shall not be subject to the direction or control of any
other person or authority in exercising any functions under this
Co nstitu tion shall b e construed as precludi ng a co urt from
exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question whether that
person or authority has performed those functions in accordance
with this Constitution or any other law.
(11) Where a person is required by this Constitution to make an
oath he shall be permitted, if he so desires, to comply with that
requirement by making an affirmation.
(12) Any reference in this Constitution to a law made before the
commencement of this Constitution shall, unless the context
otherwise requires, be construed as a reference to that law as in
force immediately before the appointed day.
(13) Any reference in this Constitution to a law that amends or
replaces any other law shall be construed as including a reference
to a law that modifies, re-enacts, with or without amendment or
modification, or makes different provisions in lieu of that other
law.
(14)
Where Parliament has by law provided for the
interpretation of Acts of Parliament, the provisions of any such law,
even if expressed to apply to laws passed after the commencement
thereof, shall apply for the purposes of interpreting this
Constitution, and otherwise in relation thereto, as they apply for the
purpose of interpreting and otherwise in relation to Acts of
Parliament as if this Constitution were an Act of Parliament passed
after the commencement of any such law as aforesaid:
Provided that, until such time as Parliament has made provision
as aforesaid, the law applicable for the interpretation of this
Constitution and otherwise in relation thereto shall be the law
which was applicable for that purpose on the appointed day.

SCHEDULES TO THE CONSTITUTION
FIRST SCHEDULE

Article 47(7)
Criminal Code (Chapter 9)
Code of Police Laws (Chapter 10)
Code of Organization and Civil Procedure (Chapter 12)

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA

89

Commercial Code (Chapter 13)
Civil Code (Chapter 16)

SECOND SCHEDULE

Substituted by:
LVIII.1974.63.

Articles 50 and 89
Oaths of Office
(a)

Oath for the due execution of the office of President.

I................................. solemnly swear/affirm that I will
faithfully execute the office of President (perform the functions of
the President) of Malta, and will, to the best of my ability preserve,
protect and defend the Constitution of Malta. (So help me God).
(b) Oath for the due execution of the office of Prime Minister or
other Minister or Parliamentary Secretary.
I ................................. solemnly swear/affirm that I will
faithfully and conscientiously perform my duties as (Prime
Minister/Minister/Parliamentary Secretary) in accordance with the
Constitution and the laws of Malta, without fear or favour. (So help
me God).

THIRD SCHEDULE

Added by:
LVIII.1974.64.

Article 124(1)
Oath of allegiance
I .................................. solemnly swear/affirm that I will bear
true faith and allegiance to the people and the Republic of Malta
and its Constitution. (So help me God).

FOURTH SCHEDULE

(Article 23)
List of Commonwealth Countries other than Malta
Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Botswana

Added by:
XXIII.1989.9.
Amended by:
Proc. No. II of
1990;
Proc. No. VI of
1990;
Proc. No. IV of
1995;
Proc. No. III of
1996;
III.2000.6.

90

CONSTITUTION OF MALTA
Brunei Darussalam
Cameroon
Canada
Cyprus
Dominica
The Gambia
Ghana
Grenada
Guyana
India
Jamaica
Kenya
Kiribati
Lesotho
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
New Zealand
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Swaziland
Tanzania
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tuvalu
Uganda
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and
Colonies
Vanuatu
Western Samoa
Zambia
Zimbabwe.

